DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: I know more about
ISIS than the generals,
believe me.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: I have
sat at that table in the
Situation
Room.
DONALD TRUMP: Nobody knows
the system better than me.
I alone can fix it.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I'm
going to close my campaign
focused on opportunities for
kids
and fairness for families.
DONALD TRUMP: Hillary
failed on the economy.
Everything she touched
didn't work out.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Even if
you're totally opposed to Donald
Trump, you may still have
some questions about me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away tonight.
Welcome to this "PBS NewsHour"
special coverage of the final
presidential debate between
Democrat
Hillary Clinton and
Republican Donald Trump.
The stage is set at the
University of Nevada, Las Vegas,
at a time when the most recent
polls, both national and in
battleground states, show a
surge in support for Clinton,
while
Trump's numbers have been
slipping, especially since the
release of the 2005 video where
he's heard using lewd language,
boasting about being sexually
aggressive.
The debate moderator, Chris
Wallace of FOX News, announced
ahead of time that there will
be six topics tonight, not
necessarily in this order, debt
and entitlement, immigration,
the economy, the Supreme Court,
foreign hot spots, and fitness
to be president.
To watch it all, joining me here
at this table in Washington, our
regular "NewsHour" contributors,
syndicated columnist Mark
Shields, New York Times
columnist David Brooks, and Amy
Walter
of The Cook Political Report.
So, we're at the third one.
And it will all be
over after this one.
David, do you expect
them to go high or low?
DAVID BROOKS: You promise
it will be over?
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: No, I expect her
to go high, him to go low.
He's behind, and so he's got
to try some desperate move.
And the trick for her will be to
see if she can be strong enough
to rebut whatever he
says, while still projecting
some sense of positivity that
will attract some people to
her.
My big question, though, for the
country is, do we want to take a
shower after this is
over?
Will we feel better about
our country or worse?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Low
or high, Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: I think Donald
Trump won the nomination going
away and prevailed in the
debates by exposing and playing
to the vulnerabilities and
perceived weaknesses of his
opponents.
He has to have concluded after
-- and he rattled them.
And he bullied them.
And he has to have concluded,
after two debates, that that
hasn't worked with Hillary
Clinton.
After 26 debates with Barack
Obama, she's far more formidable
than anybody he faced
in the Republican primaries.
And I don't know.
I think he's just going to
throw everything today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: And that's the challenge
for the third debate
too.
Your home always told, you never
get a second chance to make a
good first impression.
His first debate performance, I
think, in many ways sealed the
fate of his entire candidacy.
Now, he can try to come back in
the third debate and go after
Hillary Clinton more
aggressively.
But I don't know that that's
going to make much of a
difference, although this is
what
a Republican strategist told
me he needs to do tonight.
He just put in all caps,
"E-mails, foundation, failed
record, e-mails, foundation,
failed
failed record."
That is, I think, what you're
going to hear from Donald Trump.
WALLACE: Good evening from the
Thomas and Mack Center at the
University of Nevada, Las
Vegas.
I'm Chris Wallace of Fox News,
and I welcome you to the third
and final of the 2016
presidential
debates between Secretary of
State Hillary Clinton and Donald
J. Trump.
WALLACE: This debate is
sponsored by the Commission on
Presidential Debates.
The commission has designed the
format: Six roughly 15-minute
segments with two-minute
answers to the first question,
then open discussion for the
rest of each segment.
Both campaigns have
agreed to those rules.
For the record, I decided the
topics and the questions in each
topic.
None of those questions has been
shared with the commission or
the two candidates.
The audience here in the hall
has promised to remain silent.
No cheers, boos, or other
interruptions so we and you can
focus on what the candidates
have to say.
WALLACE: No noise, except right
now, as we welcome the
Democratic nominee for
president,
Secretary Clinton, and the
Republican nominee for
president, Mr. Trump.
(APPLAUSE)
Secretary Clinton,
Mr. Trump, welcome.
Let's get right to it.
The first topic is
the Supreme Court.
You both talked briefly about
the court in the last debate,
but I want to drill down
on this, because the next
president will almost certainly
have at least one appointment
and
likely or possibly two
or three appointments.
WALLACE: Which means that you
will, in effect, determine the
balance of the court for what
could be the next
quarter century.
First of all, where do you want
to see the court take the
country?
And secondly, what's your view
on how the Constitution should
be interpreted?
Do the founders' words mean what
they say or is it a living
document to be applied flexibly
according to changing
circumstances?
In this segment, Secretary
Clinton, you go first.
You have two minutes.
CLINTON: Thank you
very much, Chris.
And thanks to UNLV
for hosting us.
You know, I think when we talk
about the Supreme Court, it
really raises the central issue
in this election, namely, what
kind of country are we going to
be?
What kind of opportunities will
we provide for our citizens?
What kind of rights
will Americans have?
And I feel strongly that the
Supreme Court needs to stand on
the side of the American
people, not on the side of the
powerful corporations and the
wealthy.
For me, that means that we need
a Supreme Court that will stand
up on behalf of women's
rights, on behalf of the rights
of the LGBT community, that will
stand up and say no to
Citizens United, a decision that
has undermined the election
system in our country because
of the way it permits dark,
unaccountable money to come into
our electoral system.
I have major disagreements with
my opponent about these issues
and others that will be
before the Supreme Court.
But I feel that at this point in
our country's history, it is
important that we not reverse
marriage equality, that we not
reverse Roe v. Wade, that we
stand up against Citizens
United, we stand up for the
rights of people in the
workplace, that we stand up and
basically
say: The Supreme Court
should represent all of us.
That's how I see the court, and
the kind of people that I would
be looking to nominate
to the court would be in the
great tradition of standing up
to the powerful, standing up
on behalf of our
rights as Americans.
And I look forward to
having that opportunity.
I would hope that the Senate
would do its job and confirm the
nominee that President
Obama has sent to them.
That's the way the Constitution
fundamentally should operate.
The president nominates, and
then the Senate advises and
consents, or not, but they go
forward with the process.
WALLACE: Secretary
Clinton, thank you.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump,
same question.
Where do you want to see the
court take the country?
And how do you believe the
Constitution should be
interpreted?
TRUMP: Well, first of all, it's
great to be with you, and thank
you, everybody.
The Supreme Court: It's
what it's all about.
Our country is so, so -- it's
just so imperative that we have
the right justices.
Something happened recently
where Justice Ginsburg made some
very, very inappropriate
statements toward me and toward
a tremendous number of people,
many, many millions of people
that I represent.
And she was forced to apologize.
And apologize she did.
But these were statements that
should never, ever have been
made.
We need a Supreme Court that in
my opinion is going to uphold
the Second Amendment, and
all amendments, but the Second
Amendment, which is under
absolute siege.
I believe if my opponent should
win this race, which I truly
don't think will happen, we
will have a Second Amendment
which will be a very, very small
replica of what it is right
now.
But I feel that it's absolutely
important that we uphold,
because of the fact that it
is under such trauma.
I feel that the justices that I
am going to appoint -- and I've
named 20 of them -- the
justices that I'm going to
appoint will be pro-life.
They will have a
conservative bent.
They will be protecting
the Second Amendment.
They are great scholars in all
cases, and they're people of
tremendous respect.
They will interpret the
Constitution the way the
founders wanted it interpreted.
And I believe that's
very, very important.
I don't think we should have
justices appointed that decide
what they want to hear.
It's all about the Constitution
of -- of -- and so important,
the Constitution the way it
was meant to be.
And those are the people
that I will appoint.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump, thank you.
WALLACE: We now have about 10
minutes for an open discussion.
I want to focus on two issues
that, in fact, by the justices
that you name could end up
changing the existing
law of the land.
First is one that you mentioned,
Mr. Trump, and that is guns.
Secretary Clinton, you said last
year, let me quote, "The Supreme
Court is wrong on the
Second Amendment."
And now, in fact, in the 2008
Heller case, the court ruled
that there is a constitutional
right to bear arms, but a right
that is reasonably limited.
Those were the words of the
Judge Antonin Scalia who wrote
the decision.
What's wrong with that?
CONTENT FROM PHILIPS
Patient-centered healthcare is
coming
Discover how value-based care
can lead to greater efficiency
and better patient outcomes.
CLINTON: Well, first of all, I
support the Second Amendment.
I lived in Arkansas for
18 wonderful years.
I represented upstate New York.
I understand and respect the
tradition of gun ownership.
It goes back to the
founding of our country.
But I also believe that there
can be and must be reasonable
regulation.
Because I support the Second
Amendment doesn't mean that I
want people who shouldn't have
guns to be able to threaten you,
kill you or members of your
family.
And so when I think about what
we need to do, we have 33,000
people a year who die from
guns.
I think we need comprehensive
background checks, need to close
the online loophole, close the
gun show loophole.
There's other matters that I
think are sensible that are the
kind of reforms that would make
a difference that are not in any
way conflicting with the Second
Amendment.
You mentioned the
Heller decision.
And what I was saying that you
referenced, Chris, was that I
disagreed with the way the
court applied the Second
Amendment in that case, because
what the District of Columbia
was trying to do was to protect
toddlers from guns and so they
wanted people with guns to
safely store them.
And the court didn't accept that
reasonable regulation, but
they've accepted many others.
So I see no conflict between
saving people's lives and
defending the Second Amendment.
WALLACE: Let me bring
Mr. Trump in here.
The bipartisan Open Debate
Coalition got millions of votes
on questions to ask here, and
this
was, in fact, one of the top
questions that they got.
How will you ensure the Second
Amendment is protected?
You just heard Secretary
Clinton's answer.
Does she persuade you that,
while you may disagree on
regulation, that, in fact, she
supports a Second Amendment
right to bear arms?
TRUMP: Well, the D.C. vs. Heller
decision was very strongly --
and she was extremely
angry about it.
I watched.
I mean, she was very,
very angry when upheld.
And Justice Scalia
was so involved.
And it was a
well-crafted decision.
But Hillary was extremely
upset, extremely angry.
And people that believe in the
Second Amendment and believe in
it very strongly were very
upset with what she had to say.
WALLACE: Well, let me bring
in Secretary Clinton.
Were you extremely upset?
CLINTON: Well, I was upset
because, unfortunately, dozens
of toddlers injure themselves,
even
kill people with guns, because,
unfortunately, not everyone who
has loaded guns in their
homes takes appropriate
precautions.
But there's no doubt that I
respect the Second Amendment,
that I also believe there's an
individual right to bear arms.
That is not in conflict with
sensible, commonsense
regulation.
And, you know, look, I
understand that Donald's been
strongly supported by the NRA.
The gun lobby's on his side.
They're running millions of
dollars of ads against me.
And I regret that, because what
I would like to see is for
people to come together and
say: Of course we're going to
protect and defend the Second
Amendment.
But we're going to do it in a
way that tries to save some of
these 33,000 lives that we
lose every year.
WALLACE: Let me bring Mr. Trump
back into this, because, in
fact, you oppose any limits
on assault weapons, any limits
on high- capacity magazines.
You support a national
right to carry law.
Why, sir?
TRUMP: Well, let me just tell
you before we go any further.
In Chicago, which has the
toughest gun laws in the United
States, probably you could say
by far, they have more gun
violence than any other city.
So we have the toughest laws,
and you have tremendous gun
violence.
I am a very strong supporter
of the Second Amendment.
And I am -- I don't know if
Hillary was saying it in a
sarcastic manner, but I'm very
proud
to have the endorsement
of the NRA.
And it's the earliest
endorsement they've ever given
to anybody who ran for
president.
So I'm very honored
by all of that.
We are going to appoint justices
-- this is the best way to help
the Second Amendment.
We are going to appoint justices
that will feel very strongly
about the Second Amendment,
that will not do damage
to the Second Amendment.
WALLACE: Well, let's pick up on
another issue which divides you
and the justices that whoever
ends up winning this election
appoints could have a dramatic
effect there, and that's the
issue of abortion.
TRUMP: Right.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump,
you're pro-life.
But I want to ask you
specifically: Do you want the
court, including the justices
that
you will name, to overturn Roe
v. Wade, which includes -- in
fact, states -- a woman's right
to abortion?
TRUMP: Well, if that would
happen, because I am pro-life,
and I will be appointing
pro-life
judges, I would think that that
will go back to the individual
states.
WALLACE: But I'm asking
you specifically.
Would you like to...
TRUMP: If they overturned it,
it will go back to the states.
WALLACE: But what I'm asking
you, sir, is, do you want to see
the court overturn -- you
just said you want to see the
court protect the Second
Amendment.
Do you want to see the court
overturn Roe v. Wade?
TRUMP: Well, if we put another
two or perhaps three justice on,
that's really what's going
to be -- that will happen.
And that'll happen
automatically, in my opinion,
because I am putting pro-life
justices on
the court.
I will say this: It will go back
to the states, and the states
will then make a determination.
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: Well, I strongly
support Roe v. Wade, which
guarantees a constitutional
right to
a woman to make the most
intimate, most difficult, in
many cases, decisions about her
health
care that one can imagine.
And in this case, it's not
only about Roe v. Wade.
It is about what's happening
right now in America.
So many states are putting very
stringent regulations on women
that block them from
exercising that choice to the
extent that they are defunding
Planned Parenthood, which,
of course, provides all kinds of
cancer screenings and other
benefits for women in our
country.
Donald has said he's in favor of
defunding Planned Parenthood.
He even supported shutting the
government down to defund
Planned Parenthood.
I will defend
I will defend Roe v. Wade, and I
will defend women's rights to
make their own health care
decisions.
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton...
CLINTON: And we have come too
far to have that turned back
now.
And, indeed, he said women
should be punished, that there
should be some form of
punishment
for women who obtain abortions.
And I could just not be more
opposed to that kind of
thinking.
WALLACE: I'm going to give you a
chance to respond, but I want to
ask you, Secretary
Clinton, I want to explore how
far you believe the right to
abortion goes.
You have been quoted as saying
that the fetus has no
constitutional rights.
You also voted against a ban on
late-term, partial-birth
abortions.
Why?
CLINTON: Because Roe v. Wade
very clearly sets out that there
can be regulations on
abortion so long as the life and
the health of the mother are
taken into account.
And when I voted as a senator, I
did not think that that was the
case.
The kinds of cases that fall at
the end of pregnancy are often
the most heartbreaking,
painful decisions for
families to make.
I have met with women who toward
the end of their pregnancy get
the worst news one could
get, that their health is in
jeopardy if they continue to
carry to term or that something
terrible has happened or just
been discovered about the
pregnancy.
I do not think the United States
government should be stepping in
and making those most
personal of decisions.
So you can regulate if you are
doing so with the life and the
health of the mother taken
into account.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump,
your reaction?
And particularly on this issue
of late-term, partial-birth
abortions.
TRUMP: Well, I think
it's terrible.
If you go with what Hillary is
saying, in the ninth month, you
can take the baby and
rip the baby out of the womb of
the mother just prior to the
birth of the baby.
Now, you can say that that's OK
and Hillary can say that that's
OK.
But it's not OK with me, because
based on what she's saying, and
based on where she's
going, and where she's been, you
can take the baby and rip the
baby out of the womb
in the ninth month
on the final day.
And that's not acceptable.
CLINTON: Well, that is not
what happens in these cases.
And using that kind of scare
rhetoric is just terribly
unfortunate.
You should meet with some of the
women that I have met with,
women I have known over the
course of my life.
This is one of the worst
possible choices that any woman
and her family has to make.
And I do not believe the
government should be making it.
You know, I've had the great
honor of traveling across the
world on behalf of our country.
I've been to countries where
governments either forced women
to have abortions, like they
used to do in China, or forced
women to bear children, like
they used to do in Romania.
And I can tell you: The
government has no business in
the decisions that women make
with their families in
accordance with their faith,
with medical advice.
And I will stand
up for that right.
WALLACE: All right.
But just briefly, I want to
move on to another segment...
TRUMP: And, honestly, nobody has
business doing what I just said,
doing that, as late
as one or two or three or
four days prior to birth.
Nobody has that.
WALLACE: All right.
Let's move on to the
subject of immigration.
And there is almost no issue
that separates the two of you
more than the issue of
immigration.
Actually, there are a lot of
issues that separate the two of
you.
Mr. Trump, you want
to build a wall.
Secretary Clinton, you have
offered no specific plan for how
you want to secure our southern
border.
Mr. Trump, you are calling
for major deportations.
Secretary Clinton, you say that
within your first 100 days as
president you're going to
offer a package that includes
a pathway to citizenship.
The question, really, is, why
are you right and your opponent
wrong?
Mr. Trump, you go first
in this segment.
You have two minutes.
TRUMP: Well, first of all, she
wants to give amnesty, which is
a disaster and very unfair
to all of the people that are
waiting on line for many, many
years.
We need strong borders.
In the audience tonight, we have
four mothers of -- I mean, these
are unbelievable people
that I've gotten to know over a
period of years whose children
have been killed, brutally
killed by people that came
into the country illegally.
You have thousands of mothers
and fathers and relatives all
over the country.
They're coming in illegally.
Drugs are pouring in
through the border.
We have no country if
we have no border.
Hillary wants to give amnesty.
She wants to have open borders.
The border -- as you know, the
Border Patrol agents,
16,500-plus ICE last week,
endorsed
me.
First time they've ever
endorsed a candidate.
It means their job is tougher.
But they know what's going on.
They know it better
than anybody.
They want strong borders.
They feel we have to
have strong borders.
I was up in New Hampshire
the other day.
The biggest complaint they have
-- it's with all of the problems
going on in the world,
many of the problems caused by
Hillary Clinton and by Barack
Obama.
All of the problems -- the
single biggest problem is heroin
that pours across our southern
border.
It's just pouring and
destroying their youth.
It's poisoning the blood of
their youth and plenty of other
people.
We have to have strong borders.
We have to keep the drugs
out of our country.
We are -- right now, we're
getting the drugs, they're
getting the cash.
We need strong borders.
We need absolute -- we
cannot give amnesty.
Now, I want to build the wall.
We need the wall.
And the Border Patrol, ICE,
they all want the wall.
We stop the drugs.
We shore up the border.
One of my first acts will be to
get all of the drug lords, all
of the bad ones -- we
have some bad, bad people in
this country that have to go
out.
We're going to get them out;
we're going to secure the
border.
And once the border is secured,
at a later date, we'll make a
determination as to the
rest.
But we have some bad hombres
here, and we're going to get
them out.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump, thank you.
Same question to you,
Secretary Clinton.
Basically, why are you right
and Mr. Trump is wrong?
CLINTON: Well, as he was
talking, I was thinking about a
young girl I met here in Las
Vegas,
Carla, who is very worried that
her parents might be deported,
because she was born in
this country but they were not.
They work hard, they do
everything they can to give her
a good life.
And you're right.
I don't want to rip
families apart.
I don't want to be sending
parents away from children.
I don't want to see the
deportation force that Donald
has talked about in action in
our country.
We have 11 million
undocumented people.
They have 4 million American
citizen children, 15 million
people.
He said as recently as a few
weeks ago in Phoenix that every
undocumented person would
be subject to deportation.
Now, here's what that means.
It means you would have to have
a massive law enforcement
presence, where law enforcement
officers would be going school
to school, home to home,
business to business, rounding
up people who are undocumented.
And we would then have to put
them on trains, on buses to get
them out of our country.
I think that is an idea that is
not in keeping with who we are
as a nation.
I think it's an idea that
would rip our country apart.
I have been for border
security for years.
I voted for border security
in the United States Senate.
And my comprehensive immigration
reform plan of course includes
border security.
But I want to put our resources
where I think they're most
needed: Getting rid of any
violent
person.
Anybody who should be deported,
we should deport them.
When it comes to the wall that
Donald talks about building, he
went to Mexico, he had
a meeting with the
Mexican president.
Didn't even raise it.
He choked and then got into a
Twitter war because the Mexican
president said we're not
paying for that wall.
So I think we are both a nation
of immigrants and we are a
nation of laws and that we can
act accordingly.
And that's why I'm introducing
comprehensive immigration reform
within the first 100 days
with the path to citizenship.
WALLACE: Thank you,
Secretary Clinton.
I want to follow up...
TRUMP: Chris, I think it's...
WALLACE: OK.
TRUMP: I think I should
respond to that.
First of all, I had a very good
meeting with the president of
Mexico.
Very nice man.
We will be doing very much
better with Mexico on trade
deals.
Believe me.
The NAFTA deal signed by her
husband is one of the worst
deals ever made of any kind,
signed by anybody.
It's a disaster.
Hillary Clinton wanted the wall.
Hillary Clinton fought for the
wall in 2006 or thereabouts.
Now, she never gets anything
done, so naturally the wall
wasn't built.
But Hillary Clinton
wanted the wall.
WALLACE: Well, let me --
wait, wait, sir, let me...
TRUMP: We are a country of laws.
We either have --
and by the way...
WALLACE: Now, wait.
I'd like to hear from...
TRUMP: Well -- well, but
she said one thing.
WALLACE: I'd like to hear -- I'd
like to hear from Secretary
Clinton.
CLINTON: I voted for border
security, and there are...
TRUMP: And the wall.
CLINTON: There are some limited
places where that was
appropriate.
There also is necessarily going
to be new technology and how
best to deploy that.
But it is clear, when you look
at what Donald has been
proposing, he started his
campaign
bashing immigrants, calling
Mexican immigrants rapists and
criminals and drug dealers, that
he has a very different view
about what we should do to deal
with immigrants.
Now, what I am also arguing is
that bringing undocumented
immigrants out from the shadows,
putting them into the formal
economy will be good, because
then employers
them and undercut
Americans' wages.
And Donald knows a
lot about this.
He used undocumented labor
to build the Trump Tower.
He underpaid undocumented
workers, and when they
complained, he basically said
what a
lot of employers do: "You
complain, I'll get you
deported."
I want to get everybody out of
the shadows, get the economy
working, and not let employers
like Donald exploit undocumented
workers, which hurts them, but
also hurts American
workers.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump?
TRUMP: President Obama has
moved millions of people out.
Nobody knows about it,
nobody talks about it.
But under Obama, millions of
people have been moved out of
this country.
They've been deported.
She doesn't want to say that,
but that's what's happened, and
that's what happened big league.
As far as moving these people
out and moving -- we either have
a country or we don't.
We're a country of laws.
We either have a
border or we don't.
Now, you can come back in and
you can become a citizen.
But it's very unfair.
We have millions of people
that did it the right way.
They're on line.
They're waiting.
We're going to speed up the
process, big league, because
it's very inefficient.
But they're on line and they're
waiting to become citizens.
Very unfair that somebody runs
across the border, becomes a
citizen, under her plan,
you have open borders.
You would have a disaster on
trade, and you will have a
disaster with your open borders.
WALLACE: I want to...
TRUMP: But what she doesn't say
is that President Obama has
deported millions and millions
of
people just the way it is.
WALLACE: Secretary
Clinton, I want to...
CLINTON: We will not
have open borders.
That is...
WALLACE: Well, let
me -- Secretary...
CLINTON: That is a rank
mischaracterization.
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton...
CLINTON: We will have secure
borders, but we'll also have
reform.
And this used to be
a bipartisan issue.
Ronald Reagan was the
last president...
WALLACE: Secretary
Clinton, excuse me.
Secretary Clinton.
CLINTON: ... to sign immigration
reform, and George W. Bush
supported it, as well.
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton, I
want to clear up your position
on this issue, because in
a speech you gave to a Brazilian
bank, for which you were paid
$225,000, we've learned
from the WikiLeaks, that you
said this, and I want to quote.
"My dream is a hemispheric
common market with open trade
and open borders."
So that's the question...
TRUMP: Thank you.
WALLACE: That's the question.
Please quiet, everybody.
Is that your dream,
open borders?
CLINTON: Well, if you went on to
read the rest of the sentence, I
was talking about
energy.
You know, we trade more energy
with our neighbors than we trade
with the rest of the world
combined.
And I do want us to have an
electric grid, an energy system
that crosses borders.
I think that would be a
great benefit to us.
But you are very clearly
quoting from WikiLeaks.
And what's really important
about WikiLeaks is that the
Russian government has engaged
in espionage against Americans.
They have hacked American
websites, American accounts of
private people, of institutions.
Then they have given that
information to WikiLeaks for the
purpose of putting it on the
Internet.
This has come from the highest
levels of the Russian
government, clearly, from Putin
himself,
in an effort, as 17 of our
intelligence agencies have
confirmed, to influence our
election.
CLINTON: So I actually think the
most important question of this
evening, Chris, is, finally,
will Donald Trump admit and
condemn that the Russians are
doing this and make it clear
that he will not have the help
of Putin in in this election,
that he rejects Russian
espionage against Americans,
which he actually encouraged in
the past?
Those are the questions
we need answered.
We've never had anything like
this happen in any of our
elections before.
WALLACE: Well?
TRUMP: That was a great pivot
off the fact that she wants open
borders, OK?
How did we get on to Putin?
WALLACE: Hold on
-- hold on, wait.
Hold on, folks.
Because we -- this is going to
end up getting out of control.
Let's try to keep it quiet so --
for the candidates and for the
American people.
TRUMP: So just to finish
on the borders...
WALLACE: Yes?
TRUMP: She wants open borders.
People are going to
pour into our country.
come in from Syria.
She wants 550 percent more
people than Barack Obama, and he
has thousands and thousands
of people.
They have no idea
where they come from.
And you see, we are going to
stop radical Islamic terrorism
in this country.
She won't even mention the
words, and neither will
President Obama.
So I just want to tell you,
she wants open borders.
Now we can talk about Putin.
I don't know Putin.
He said nice things about me.
If we got along well,
that would be good.
If Russia and the United States
got along well and went after
ISIS, that would be good.
He has no respect for her.
He has no respect
for our president.
And I'll tell you what: We're in
very serious trouble, because we
have a country with tremendous
numbers of nuclear warheads --
1,800, by the way -- where they
expanded and we didn't,
1,800 nuclear warheads.
And she's playing chicken.
Look, Putin...
WALLACE: Wait, but...
TRUMP: ... from everything I
see, has no respect for this
person.
CLINTON: Well, that's because
he'd rather have a puppet as
president of the United States.
TRUMP: No puppet.
No puppet.
CLINTON: And it's
pretty clear...
TRUMP: You're the puppet!
CLINTON: It's pretty
clear you won't admit...
TRUMP: No, you're the puppet.
CLINTON: ... that the Russians
have engaged in cyberattacks
against the United States
of America, that you encouraged
espionage against our people,
that you are willing to
spout the Putin line, sign up
for his wish list, break up
NATO, do whatever he wants
to do, and that you continue to
get help from him, because he
has a very clear favorite
in this race.
So I think that this is such
an unprecedented situation.
We've never had a foreign
government trying to interfere
in our election.
We have 17 -- 17 intelligence
agencies, civilian and military,
who have all concluded that
these espionage attacks, these
cyberattacks, come from the
highest levels of the Kremlin
and they are designed to
influence our election.
I find that deeply disturbing.
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton...
CLINTON: And I think it's
time you take a stand...
TRUMP: She has no idea whether
it's Russia, China, or anybody
else.
CLINTON: I am not
quoting myself.
TRUMP: She has no idea.
CLINTON: I am quoting 17...
TRUMP: Hillary,
you have no idea.
CLINTON: ... 17 intelligence --
do you doubt 17 military and
civilian...
TRUMP: And our
country has no idea.
CLINTON: ... agencies.
TRUMP: Yeah, I doubt it.
I doubt it.
CLINTON: Well, he'd rather
believe Vladimir Putin than the
military and civilian
intelligence
professionals who are
sworn to protect us.
I find that just absolutely...
(CROSSTALK)
TRUMP: She doesn't like Putin
because Putin has outsmarted her
at every step of the way.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump...
TRUMP: Excuse me.
Putin has outsmarted
her in Syria.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump...
(CROSSTALK)
TRUMP: He's outsmarted her
every step of the way.
WALLACE: I do get to
ask some questions.
TRUMP: Yes, that's fine.
WALLACE: And I would like to
ask you this direct question.
The top national security
officials of this country do
believe that Russia has been
behind
these hacks.
Even if you don't know for sure
whether they are, do you condemn
any interference by Russia
in the American election?
TRUMP: By Russia
or anybody else.
WALLACE: You condemn
their interference?
TRUMP: Of course I condemn.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: I know more about
ISIS than the generals,
believe me.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: I have
sat at that table in the
Situation
Room.
DONALD TRUMP: Nobody knows the
system better than me. I alone
can fix it.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I'm
going to close my campaign
focused on opportunities for
kids
and fairness for families.
DONALD TRUMP: Hillary failed on
the economy. Everything she
touched didn't work out.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Even if
you're totally opposed to Donald
Trump, you may still have
some questions about me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff. Gwen Ifill is
away tonight.
Welcome to this "PBS NewsHour"
special coverage of the final
presidential debate between
Democrat
Hillary Clinton and
Republican Donald Trump.
The stage is set at the
University of Nevada, Las Vegas,
at a time when the most recent
polls, both national and in
battleground states, show a
surge in support for Clinton,
while
Trump's numbers have been
slipping, especially since the
release of the 2005 video where
he's heard using lewd language,
boasting about being sexually
aggressive.
The debate moderator, Chris
Wallace of FOX News, announced
ahead of time that there will
be six topics tonight, not
necessarily in this order, debt
and entitlement, immigration,
the economy, the Supreme Court,
foreign hot spots, and fitness
to be president.
To watch it all, joining me here
at this table in Washington, our
regular "NewsHour" contributors,
syndicated columnist Mark
Shields, New York Times
columnist David Brooks, and Amy
Walter
of The Cook Political Report.
So, we're at the third one. And
it will all be over after this
one.
David, do you expect
them to go high or low?
DAVID BROOKS: You promise
it will be over?
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: No, I expect her
to go high, him to go low.
He's behind, and so he's got to
try some desperate move. And the
trick for her will be to see
if she can be strong enough to
rebut whatever he says, while
still projecting some sense
of positivity that will
attract some people to her.
My big question, though, for the
country is, do we want to take a
shower after this is
over? Will we feel better
about our country or worse?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Low
or high, Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: I think Donald
Trump won the nomination going
away and prevailed in the
debates by exposing and playing
to the vulnerabilities and
perceived weaknesses of his
opponents.
He has to have concluded after
-- and he rattled them. And he
bullied them. And he has to have
concluded, after two debates,
that that hasn't worked with
Hillary Clinton. After 26
debates
with Barack Obama, she's far
more formidable than anybody he
faced in the Republican
primaries.
And I don't know. I think he's
just going to throw everything
today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: And that's the challenge
for the third debate
too.
Your home always told, you never
get a second chance to make a
good first impression. His
first debate performance, I
think, in many ways sealed the
fate of his entire candidacy.
Now, he can try to come back in
the third debate and go after
Hillary Clinton more
aggressively.
But I don't know that that's
going to make much of a
difference, although this is
what
a Republican strategist told me
he needs to do tonight. He just
put in all caps, "E-mails,
foundation, failed record,
e-mails, foundation, failed
record, e-mails, foundation,
failed
record."
That is, I think, what you're
going to hear from Donald Trump.
WALLACE: Good evening from the
Thomas and Mack Center at the
University of Nevada, Las
Vegas. I'm Chris Wallace of Fox
News, and I welcome you to the
third and final of the
2016 presidential debates
between Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton and Donald J.
Trump.
WALLACE: This debate is
sponsored by the Commission on
Presidential Debates. The
commission has
designed the format: Six roughly
15-minute segments with
two-minute answers to the first
question, then open discussion
for the rest of each segment.
Both campaigns have agreed
to those rules.
For the record, I decided the
topics and the questions in each
topic. None of those questions
has been shared with the
commission or the two
candidates. The audience here in
the hall
has promised to remain silent.
No cheers, boos, or other
interruptions so we and you
can focus on what the
candidates have to say.
WALLACE: No noise, except right
now, as we welcome the
Democratic nominee for
president,
Secretary Clinton, and the
Republican nominee for
president, Mr. Trump.
(APPLAUSE)
Secretary Clinton, Mr. Trump,
welcome. Let's get right to it.
The first topic is the Supreme
Court.
You both talked briefly about
the court in the last debate,
but I want to drill down
on this, because the next
president will almost certainly
have at least one appointment
and
likely or possibly two
or three appointments.
WALLACE: Which means that you
will, in effect, determine the
balance of the court for what
could be the next
quarter century.
First of all, where do you want
to see the court take the
country? And secondly, what's
your view on how the
Constitution should be
interpreted? Do the founders'
words mean what
they say or is it a living
document to be applied flexibly
according to changing
circumstances?
In this segment, Secretary
Clinton, you go first. You have
two minutes.
CLINTON: Thank you very much,
Chris. And thanks to UNLV for
hosting us.
You know, I think when we talk
about the Supreme Court, it
really raises the central issue
in this election, namely, what
kind of country are we going to
be? What kind of opportunities
will we provide for our
citizens? What kind of rights
will Americans have?
And I feel strongly that the
Supreme Court needs to stand on
the side of the American
people, not on the side of the
powerful corporations and the
wealthy. For me, that means that
we
need a Supreme Court that will
stand up on behalf of women's
rights, on behalf of the
rights of the LGBT community,
that will stand up and say no to
Citizens United, a decision
that has undermined the election
system in our country because of
the way it permits
dark, unaccountable money to
come into our electoral system.
I have major disagreements with
my opponent about these issues
and others that will be
before the Supreme Court. But I
feel that at this point in our
country's history, it
is important that we not reverse
marriage equality, that we not
reverse Roe v. Wade,
that we stand up against
Citizens United, we stand up for
the rights of people in the
workplace, that we stand up and
basically say: The Supreme Court
should represent all
of us.
That's how I see the court, and
the kind of people that I would
be looking to nominate
to the court would be in the
great tradition of standing up
to the powerful, standing up
on behalf of our
rights as Americans.
And I look forward to having
that opportunity. I would hope
that the Senate would do its
job and confirm the nominee that
President Obama has sent to
them. That's the way the
Constitution fundamentally
should operate. The president
nominates, and then the Senate
advises and consents, or not,
but they go forward with the
process.
WALLACE: Secretary
Clinton, thank you.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump, same
question. Where do you want to
see the court take the country?
And how do you believe the
Constitution should be
interpreted?
TRUMP: Well, first of all, it's
great to be with you, and thank
you, everybody. The Supreme
Court: It's what it's all about.
Our country is so, so -- it's
just so imperative that
we have the right justices.
Something happened recently
where Justice Ginsburg made some
very, very inappropriate
statements toward me and toward
a tremendous number of people,
many, many millions of people
that I represent. And she was
forced to apologize. And
apologize she did. But these
were statements
that should never,
ever have been made.
We need a Supreme Court that in
my opinion is going to uphold
the Second Amendment, and
all amendments, but the Second
Amendment, which is under
absolute siege. I believe if
my opponent should win this
race, which I truly don't think
will happen, we will have
a Second Amendment which will be
a very, very small replica of
what it is right now. But
I feel that it's absolutely
important that we uphold,
because of the fact that it is
under such trauma.
I feel that the justices that I
am going to appoint -- and I've
named 20 of them -- the
justices that I'm going to
appoint will be pro-life. They
will have a conservative bent.
They will be protecting the
Second Amendment. They are great
scholars in all cases, and
they're people of tremendous
respect. They will interpret the
Constitution the way the
founders wanted it interpreted.
And I believe that's very, very
important.
I don't think we should have
justices appointed that decide
what they want to hear. It's all
about the Constitution of -- of
-- and so important, the
Constitution the way it was
meant to be. And those are the
people that I will appoint.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump, thank you.
WALLACE: We now have about 10
minutes for an open discussion.
I want to focus on two
issues that, in fact, by the
justices that you name could end
up changing the existing
law of the land. First is one
that you mentioned, Mr. Trump,
and that is guns.
Secretary Clinton, you said last
year, let me quote, "The Supreme
Court is wrong on the
Second Amendment." And now, in
fact, in the 2008 Heller case,
the court ruled that there
is a constitutional right to
bear arms, but a right that is
reasonably limited. Those
were the words of the Judge
Antonin Scalia who wrote the
decision. What's wrong with
that?
CONTENT FROM PHILIPS
Patient-centered healthcare is
coming
Discover how value-based care
can lead to greater efficiency
and better patient outcomes.
CLINTON: Well, first of all, I
support the Second Amendment. I
lived in Arkansas for
18 wonderful years. I
represented upstate New York. I
understand and respect the
tradition
of gun ownership. It goes back
to the founding of our country.
But I also believe that there
can be and must be reasonable
regulation. Because I support
the Second Amendment doesn't
mean that I want people who
shouldn't have guns to be able
to threaten you, kill you
or members of your family.
And so when I think about what
we need to do, we have 33,000
people a year who die from
guns. I think we need
comprehensive background checks,
need to close the online
loophole,
close the gun show loophole.
There's other matters that I
think are sensible that are
the kind of reforms that would
make a difference that are not
in any way conflicting with the
Second Amendment.
You mentioned the Heller
decision. And what I was saying
that you referenced, Chris, was
that I disagreed with the way
the court applied the Second
Amendment in that case, because
what the District of Columbia
was trying to do was to protect
toddlers from guns and so
they wanted people with guns to
safely store them. And the court
didn't accept that reasonable
regulation, but they've accepted
many others. So I see no
conflict between saving people's
lives and defending
the Second Amendment.
WALLACE: Let me bring Mr. Trump
in here. The bipartisan Open
Debate Coalition got millions
of votes on questions to ask
here, and this was, in fact, one
of the top questions that
they got. How will you ensure
the Second Amendment is
protected? You just heard
Secretary Clinton's
answer. Does she persuade you
that, while you may disagree on
regulation, that, in fact,
she supports a Second Amendment
right to bear arms? TRUMP: Well,
the D.C. vs. Heller decision
was very strongly -- and she was
extremely angry about it. I
watched. I mean, she was
very, very angry when upheld.
And Justice Scalia was so
involved. And it was a
well-crafted
decision. But Hillary was
extremely upset, extremely
angry. And people that believe
in
the Second Amendment and believe
in it very strongly were very
upset with what she had
to say.
WALLACE: Well, let me bring in
Secretary Clinton. Were you
extremely upset?
CLINTON: Well, I was upset
because, unfortunately, dozens
of toddlers injure themselves,
even
kill people with guns, because,
unfortunately, not everyone who
has loaded guns in their
homes takes appropriate
precautions.
But there's no doubt that I
respect the Second Amendment,
that I also believe there's an
individual right to bear arms.
That is not in conflict with
sensible, commonsense
regulation.
And, you know, look, I
understand that Donald's been
strongly supported by the NRA.
The gun
lobby's on his side. They're
running millions of dollars of
ads against me. And I regret
that, because what I would like
to see is for people to come
together and say: Of course
we're going to protect and
defend the Second Amendment. But
we're going to do it in a way
that tries to save some of these
33,000 lives that we lose every
year.
WALLACE: Let me bring Mr. Trump
back into this, because, in
fact, you oppose any limits
on assault weapons, any limits
on high- capacity magazines. You
support a national right to
carry law. Why, sir?
TRUMP: Well, let me just tell
you before we go any further. In
Chicago, which has the
toughest gun laws in the United
States, probably you could say
by far, they have more gun
violence
than any other city. So we have
the toughest laws, and you have
tremendous gun violence.
I am a very strong supporter of
the Second Amendment. And I am
-- I don't know if Hillary
was saying it in a sarcastic
manner, but I'm very proud to
have the endorsement of the
NRA. And it's the earliest
endorsement they've ever given
to anybody who ran for
president.
So I'm very honored
by all of that.
We are going to appoint justices
-- this is the best way to help
the Second Amendment.
We are going to appoint justices
that will feel very strongly
about the Second Amendment,
that will not do damage
to the Second Amendment.
WALLACE: Well, let's pick up on
another issue which divides you
and the justices that whoever
ends up winning this election
appoints could have a dramatic
effect there, and that's the
issue of abortion.
TRUMP: Right.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump, you're
pro-life. But I want to ask you
specifically: Do you want
the court, including the
justices that you will name, to
overturn Roe v. Wade, which
includes -- in fact, states --
a woman's right to abortion?
TRUMP: Well, if that would
happen, because I am pro-life,
and I will be appointing
pro-life
judges, I would think that that
will go back to the individual
states.
WALLACE: But I'm asking you
specifically. Would you like
to...
TRUMP: If they overturned it,
it will go back to the states.
WALLACE: But what I'm asking
you, sir, is, do you want to see
the court overturn -- you
just said you want to see the
court protect the Second
Amendment. Do you want to see
the
court overturn Roe v. Wade?
TRUMP: Well, if we put another
two or perhaps three justice on,
that's really what's going
to be -- that will happen. And
that'll happen automatically, in
my opinion, because I am
putting pro-life justices on the
court. I will say this: It will
go back to the states,
and the states will then
make a determination.
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: Well, I strongly
support Roe v. Wade, which
guarantees a constitutional
right to
a woman to make the most
intimate, most difficult, in
many cases, decisions about her
health
care that one can imagine. And
in this case, it's not only
about Roe v. Wade. It is about
what's happening right
now in America.
So many states are putting very
stringent regulations on women
that block them from
exercising that choice to the
extent that they are defunding
Planned Parenthood, which,
of course, provides all kinds of
cancer screenings and other
benefits for women in our
country.
Donald has said he's in favor of
defunding Planned Parenthood. He
even supported shutting
the government down to defund
Planned Parenthood. I will
defend Planned Parenthood. I
will defend
Roe v. Wade, and I will defend
women's rights to make their own
health care decisions.
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton...
CLINTON: And we have come too
far to have that turned back
now. And, indeed, he said women
should be punished, that there
should be some form of
punishment for women who obtain
abortions. And I could just not
be more opposed to that
kind of thinking.
WALLACE: I'm going to give you a
chance to respond, but I want to
ask you, Secretary
Clinton, I want to explore how
far you believe the right to
abortion goes. You have been
quoted as saying that the fetus
has no constitutional rights.
You also voted against a ban on
late-term,
partial-birth abortions. Why?
CLINTON: Because Roe v. Wade
very clearly sets out that there
can be regulations on
abortion so long as the life and
the health of the mother are
taken into account. And
when I voted as a senator, I did
not think that that was the
case.
The kinds of cases that fall at
the end of pregnancy are often
the most heartbreaking,
painful decisions for families
to make. I have met with women
who toward the end of
their pregnancy get the worst
news one could get, that their
health is in jeopardy if they
continue to carry to term or
that something terrible has
happened or just been discovered
about the pregnancy. I do not
think the United States
government should be stepping in
and
making those most personal of
decisions. So you can regulate
if you are doing so with
the life and the health of the
mother taken into account.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump, your
reaction? And particularly on
this issue of late-term,
partial-birth
abortions.
TRUMP: Well, I think it's
terrible. If you go with what
Hillary is saying, in the ninth
month, you can take the baby and
rip the baby out of the womb of
the mother just prior to
the birth of the baby.
Now, you can say that that's OK
and Hillary can say that that's
OK. But it's not OK with
me, because based on what she's
saying, and based on where she's
going, and where she's
been, you can take the baby and
rip the baby out of the womb in
the ninth month on the
final day. And that's
not acceptable.
CLINTON: Well, that is not what
happens in these cases. And
using that kind of scare
rhetoric is just terribly
unfortunate. You should meet
with some of the women that I
have met with, women I have
known over the course of my
life. This is one of the worst
possible choices that any woman
and her family has to make. And
I do not believe the government
should be making it.
You know, I've had the great
honor of traveling across the
world on behalf of our country.
I've been to countries where
governments either forced women
to have abortions, like they
used to do in China, or forced
women to bear children, like
they used to do in Romania.
And I can tell you: The
government has no business in
the decisions that women make
with their families in
accordance with their faith,
with medical advice. And I will
stand
up for that right.
WALLACE: All right. But just
briefly, I want to move on to
another segment...
TRUMP: And, honestly, nobody has
business doing what I just said,
doing that, as late
as one or two or three or four
days prior to birth. Nobody has
that.
WALLACE: All right. Let's move
on to the subject of
immigration. And there is almost
no issue
that separates the two of you
more than the issue of
immigration. Actually, there are
a lot of issues that
separate the two of you.
Mr. Trump, you want to build a
wall. Secretary Clinton, you
have offered no specific plan
for how you want to secure our
southern border. Mr. Trump, you
are calling for major
deportations.
Secretary Clinton, you say that
within your first 100 days as
president you're going to
offer a package that includes a
pathway to citizenship. The
question, really, is, why
are you right and
your opponent wrong?
Mr. Trump, you go first in this
segment. You have two minutes.
TRUMP: Well, first of all, she
wants to give amnesty, which is
a disaster and very unfair
to all of the people that are
waiting on line for many, many
years. We need strong borders.
In the audience tonight, we have
four mothers of -- I mean, these
are unbelievable people
that I've gotten to know over a
period of years whose children
have been killed, brutally
killed by people that came into
the country illegally. You have
thousands of mothers and
fathers and relatives all over
the country. They're coming in
illegally. Drugs are pouring
in through the border. We have
no country if we have no border.
Hillary wants to give amnesty.
She wants to have open borders.
The border -- as you know,
the Border Patrol agents,
16,500-plus ICE last week,
endorsed me. First time they've
ever endorsed a candidate. It
means their job is tougher. But
they know what's going
on. They know it better than
anybody. They want strong
borders. They feel we have to
have strong borders.
I was up in New Hampshire the
other day. The biggest complaint
they have -- it's with all
of the problems going on in the
world, many of the problems
caused by Hillary Clinton
and by Barack Obama. All of the
problems -- the single biggest
problem is heroin that pours
across our southern border. It's
just pouring and destroying
their youth. It's poisoning
the blood of their youth and
plenty of other people. We have
to have strong borders. We
have to keep the drugs out of
our country. We are -- right
now, we're getting the drugs,
they're getting the cash. We
need strong borders. We need
absolute -- we cannot give
amnesty.
Now, I want to build the wall.
We need the wall. And the Border
Patrol, ICE, they all
want the wall. We stop the
drugs. We shore up the border.
One of my first acts will be
to get all of the drug lords,
all of the bad ones -- we have
some bad, bad people in this
country that have to go out.
We're going to get them out;
we're going to secure the
border.
And once the border is secured,
at a later date, we'll make a
determination as to the
rest. But we have some bad
hombres here, and we're going to
get them out.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump, thank you.
Same question to you, Secretary
Clinton. Basically, why
are you right and
Mr. Trump is wrong?
CLINTON: Well, as he was
talking, I was thinking about a
young girl I met here in Las
Vegas,
Carla, who is very worried that
her parents might be deported,
because she was born in
this country but they were not.
They work hard, they do
everything they can to give
her a good life.
And you're right. I don't want
to rip families apart. I don't
want to be sending parents
away from children. I don't want
to see the deportation force
that Donald has talked about
in action in our country.
We have 11 million undocumented
people. They have 4 million
American citizen children,
15 million people. He said as
recently as a few weeks ago in
Phoenix that every undocumented
person would be subject to
deportation. Now, here's what
that means. It means you would
have to have a massive law
enforcement presence, where law
enforcement officers would be
going
school to school, home to home,
business to business, rounding
up people who are undocumented.
And we would then have to put
them on trains, on buses to get
them out of our country.
I think that is an idea that is
not in keeping with who we are
as a nation. I think it's
an idea that would rip
our country apart.
I have been for border security
for years. I voted for border
security in the United
States Senate. And my
comprehensive immigration reform
plan of course includes border
security.
But I want to put our resources
where I think they're most
needed: Getting rid of any
violent
person. Anybody who should be
deported, we should deport them.
When it comes to the wall that
Donald talks about building, he
went to Mexico, he had
a meeting with the Mexican
president. Didn't even raise it.
He choked and then got into
a Twitter war because the
Mexican president said we're not
paying for that wall.
So I think we are both a nation
of immigrants and we are a
nation of laws and that we can
act accordingly. And that's why
I'm introducing comprehensive
immigration reform within the
first 100 days with the
path to citizenship.
WALLACE: Thank you, Secretary
Clinton. I want to follow up...
TRUMP: Chris, I think it's...
WALLACE: OK.
TRUMP: I think I should respond
to that. First of all, I had a
very good meeting with the
president of Mexico. Very nice
man. We will be doing very much
better with Mexico on trade
deals. Believe me. The NAFTA
deal signed by her husband is
one of the worst deals ever
made of any kind, signed by
anybody. It's a disaster.
Hillary Clinton wanted the wall.
Hillary Clinton fought for the
wall in 2006 or thereabouts.
Now, she never gets anything
done, so naturally the wall
wasn't built. But Hillary
Clinton
wanted the wall.
WALLACE: Well, let me --
wait, wait, sir, let me...
TRUMP: We are a country of laws.
We either have -- and by the
way...
WALLACE: Now, wait. I'd
like to hear from...
TRUMP: Well -- well, but
she said one thing.
WALLACE: I'd like to hear -- I'd
like to hear from Secretary
Clinton.
CLINTON: I voted for border
security, and there are...
TRUMP: And the wall.
CLINTON: There are some limited
places where that was
appropriate. There also is
necessarily
going to be new technology
and how best to deploy that.
But it is clear, when you look
at what Donald has been
proposing, he started his
campaign
bashing immigrants, calling
Mexican immigrants rapists and
criminals and drug dealers, that
he has a very different view
about what we should do to deal
with immigrants.
Now, what I am also arguing is
that bringing undocumented
immigrants out from the shadows
putting them into the economy
will be good, because employers
can't exploit
them and undercut
Americans' wages.
And Donald knows a lot about
this. He used undocumented labor
to build the Trump Tower.
He underpaid undocumented
workers, and when they
complained, he basically said
what a
lot of employers do: "You
complain, I'll get you
deported."
I want to get everybody out of
the shadows, get the economy
working, and not let employers
like Donald exploit undocumented
workers, which hurts them, but
also hurts American
workers.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump?
TRUMP: President Obama has moved
millions of people out. Nobody
knows about it, nobody
talks about it. But under Obama,
millions of people have been
moved out of this country.
They've been deported. She
doesn't want to say that, but
that's what's happened, and
that's what happened big league.
As far as moving these people
out and moving -- we either have
a country or we don't. We're
a country of laws. We either
have a border or we don't.
Now, you can come back in and
you can become a citizen. But
it's very unfair. We have
millions
of people that did it the right
way. They're on line. They're
waiting. We're going to speed
up the process, big league,
because it's very inefficient.
But they're on line and they're
waiting to become citizens.
Very unfair that somebody runs
across the border, becomes a
citizen, under her plan,
you have open borders. You would
have a disaster on trade, and
you will have a disaster with
your open borders.
WALLACE: I want to...
TRUMP: But what she doesn't say
is that President Obama has
deported millions and millions
of
people just the way it is.
WALLACE: Secretary
Clinton, I want to...
CLINTON: We will not have
open borders. That is...
WALLACE: Well, let
me -- Secretary...
CLINTON: That is a rank
mischaracterization.
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton...
CLINTON: We will have secure
borders, but we'll also have
reform. And this used to be
a bipartisan issue. Ronald
Reagan was the last president...
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton,
excuse me. Secretary Clinton.
CLINTON: ... to sign immigration
reform, and George W. Bush
supported it, as well.
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton, I
want to clear up your position
on this issue, because in
a speech you gave to a Brazilian
bank, for which you were paid
$225,000, we've learned
from the WikiLeaks, that you
said this, and I want to quote.
"My dream is a hemispheric
common market with open trade
and open borders." So that's the
question...
TRUMP: Thank you.
WALLACE: That's the question.
Please quiet, everybody. Is that
your dream, open borders?
CLINTON: Well, if you went on to
read the rest of the sentence, I
was talking about
energy. You know, we trade more
energy with our neighbors than
we trade with the rest
of the world combined. And I do
want us to have an electric
grid, an energy system that
crosses borders. I think that
would be a great benefit to us.
But you are very clearly quoting
from WikiLeaks. And what's
really important about WikiLeaks
is that the Russian government
has engaged in espionage against
Americans. They have
hacked American websites,
American accounts of private
people, of institutions. Then
they
have given that information to
WikiLeaks for the purpose of
putting it on the Internet.
This has come from the highest
levels of the Russian
government, clearly, from Putin
himself,
in an effort, as 17 of our
intelligence agencies have
confirmed, to influence our
election.
CLINTON: So I actually think the
most important question of this
evening, Chris, is, finally,
will Donald Trump admit and
condemn that the Russians are
doing this and make it clear
that he will not have the help
of Putin in in this election,
that he rejects Russian
espionage against Americans,
which he actually encouraged in
the past? Those are the
questions
we need answered. We've never
had anything like this happen in
any of our elections before.
WALLACE: Well?
TRUMP: That was a great pivot
off the fact that she wants open
borders, OK? How did we
get on to Putin?
WALLACE: Hold on -- hold on,
wait. Hold on, folks. Because we
-- this is going to end
up getting out of control. Let's
try to keep it quiet so -- for
the candidates and for
the American people.
TRUMP: So just to finish
on the borders...
WALLACE: Yes?
TRUMP: She wants open borders.
People are going to pour into
our country. People are
going to come in from Syria. She
wants 550 percent more people
than Barack Obama, and
he has thousands and thousands
of people. They have no idea
where they come from.
And you see, we are going to
stop radical Islamic terrorism
in this country. She won't
even mention the words, and
neither will President Obama. So
I just want to tell you, she
wants
open borders.
Now we can talk about Putin. I
don't know Putin. He said nice
things about me. If we
got along well, that would be
good. If Russia and the United
States got along well and went
after ISIS, that would be good.
He has no respect for her. He
has no respect for our
president. And I'll tell you
what:
We're in very serious trouble,
because we have a country with
tremendous numbers of
nuclear warheads -- 1,800, by
the way -- where they expanded
and we didn't, 1,800 nuclear
warheads. And she's playing
chicken. Look, Putin...
WALLACE: Wait, but...
TRUMP: ... from everything I
see, has no respect for this
person.
CLINTON: Well, that's because
he'd rather have a puppet as
president of the United States.
TRUMP: No puppet. No puppet.
CLINTON: And it's
pretty clear...
TRUMP: You're the puppet!
CLINTON: It's pretty
clear you won't admit...
TRUMP: No, you're the puppet.
CLINTON: ... that the Russians
have engaged in cyberattacks
against the United States
of America, that you encouraged
espionage against our people,
that you are willing to
spout the Putin line, sign up
for his wish list, break up
NATO, do whatever he wants
to do, and that you continue to
get help from him, because he
has a very clear favorite
in this race.
So I think that this is such an
unprecedented situation. We've
never had a foreign government
trying to interfere in our
election. We have 17 -- 17
intelligence agencies, civilian
and
military, who have all concluded
that these espionage attacks,
these cyberattacks, come
from the highest levels of the
Kremlin and they are designed to
influence our election.
I find that deeply disturbing.
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton...
CLINTON: And I think it's
time you take a stand...
TRUMP: She has no idea whether
it's Russia, China, or anybody
else.
CLINTON: I am not
quoting myself.
TRUMP: She has no idea.
CLINTON: I am quoting 17...
TRUMP: Hillary,
you have no idea.
CLINTON: ... 17 intelligence --
do you doubt 17 military and
civilian...
TRUMP: And our
country has no idea.
CLINTON: ... agencies.
TRUMP: Yeah, I doubt
it. I doubt it.
CLINTON: Well, he'd rather
believe Vladimir Putin than the
military and civilian
intelligence
professionals who are sworn to
protect us. I find that just
absolutely...
(CROSSTALK)
TRUMP: She doesn't like Putin
because Putin has outsmarted her
at every step of the way.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump...
TRUMP: Excuse me. Putin has
outsmarted her in Syria.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump...
(CROSSTALK)
TRUMP: He's outsmarted her
every step of the way.
WALLACE: I do get to
ask some questions.
TRUMP: Yes, that's fine.
WALLACE: And I would like to ask
you this direct question. The
top national security
officials of this country do
believe that Russia has been
behind these hacks. Even if
you don't know for sure whether
they are, do you condemn any
interference by Russia
in the American election?
TRUMP: By Russia
or anybody else.
WALLACE: You condemn
their interference?
TRUMP: Of course I condemn. Of
course I -- I don't know Putin.
I have no idea.
WALLACE: I'm not asking --
I'm asking do you condemn?
TRUMP: I never met Putin. This
is not my best friend. But if
the United States got along
with Russia, wouldn't be so bad.
Let me tell you, Putin has
outsmarted her and Obama at
every single step of the way.
Whether it's Syria, you name it.
Missiles. Take a look at the
"start up" that they signed.
The Russians have said,
according to many, many reports,
I can't believe they allowed
us to do this. They create
warheads, and we can't. The
Russians can't believe it. She
has been outsmarted by Putin.
And all you have to do is look
at the Middle East. They've
taken over. We've spent $6
trillion.
They've taken over the Middle
East. She has been outsmarted
and outplayed worse than anybody
I've ever seen in any
government whatsoever.
WALLACE: We're a long way away
from immigration, but I'm going
to let you finish this topic.
You got about 45 seconds.
TRUMP: And she always will be.
CLINTON: I -- I find it ironic
that he's raising nuclear
weapons. This is a person who
has
been very cavalier, even casual
about the use of nuclear
weapons. He's...
TRUMP: Wrong. CLINTON: ...
advocated more countries getting
them, Japan, Korea, even
Saudi Arabia. He said, well, if
we have them, why don't we use
them, which I think is
terrifying.
But here's the deal. The bottom
line on nuclear weapons is that
when the president gives the
order, it must be followed.
There's about four minutes
between the order being given
and the people responsible for
launching nuclear weapons to do
so. And that's why 10 people
who have had that awesome
responsibility have come out
and, in an unprecedented way,
said
they would not trust Donald
Trump with the nuclear codes or
to have his finger on the
nuclear button.
TRUMP: I have 200 generals...
WALLACE: Very quickly.
TRUMP: ... and admirals, 21
endorsing me, 21 congressional
Medal of Honor recipients.
As far as Japan and other
countries, we are being ripped
off by everybody in the -- we're
defending other countries. We
are spending a fortune doing it.
They have the bargain
of the century.
All I said is, we have to
renegotiate these agreements,
because our country cannot
afford
to defend Saudi Arabia, Japan,
Germany, South Korea, and many
other places. We cannot continue
to afford -- she took that
as saying nuclear weapons.
WALLACE: OK.
TRUMP: Look, she's been proven
to be a liar on so many
different ways. This is just
another
lie.
CLINTON: Well, I'm just quoting
you when you were asked...
TRUMP: There's no quote. You're
not going to find a quote from
me.
CLINTON: ... about a potential
nuclear -- nuclear competition
in Asia, you said, you know, go
ahead, enjoy yourselves,
folks. That kind...
TRUMP: And defend yourselves.
CLINTON: ... of
language -- well...
TRUMP: And defend yourselves. I
didn't say nuclear. And defend
yourself.
CLINTON: The United States has
kept the peace -- the United
States has kept the peace
through
our alliances. Donald wants to
tear up our alliances. I think
it makes the world safer
and, frankly, it makes the
United States safer. I would
work with our allies in Asia, in
Europe,
in the Middle East, and
elsewhere. That's the only way
we're going to be able to keep
the peace.
WALLACE: We're going to -- no,
we are going to move on to the
next topic, which is the
economy. And I hope we handle
that as well as we did
immigration. You also have very
different ideas about how to get
the economy growing faster.
Secretary Clinton, in your
plan, government plays a big
role. You see more government
spending, more entitlements,
more tax credits, more tax
penalties. Mr. Trump, you want
to get government out with
lower taxes and less regulation.
TRUMP: Yes.
WALLACE: We're going to drill
down into this a little bit
more. But in this overview,
please
explain to me why you believe
that your plan will create more
jobs and growth for this
country and your opponent's plan
will not. In this round, you go
first, Secretary Clinton.
CLINTON: Well, I think when the
middle class thrives, America
thrives. And so my plan is
based on growing the economy,
giving middle-class families
many more opportunities. I want
us
to have the biggest jobs program
since World War II, jobs in
infrastructure and advanced
manufacturing. I think we can
compete with high-wage
countries, and I believe we
should.
New jobs and clean energy, not
only to fight climate change,
which is a serious problem,
but to create new opportunities
and new businesses.
I want us to do more to help
small business. That's where
two- thirds of the new jobs are
going to come from. I want us to
raise the national minimum wage,
because people who
live in poverty should not --
who work full-time should not
still be in poverty. And I sure
do want to make sure women get
equal pay for the work we do.
I feel strongly that we have to
have an education system that
starts with preschool and goes
through college. That's why I
want more technical education in
high schools and in community
colleges, real apprenticeships
to prepare young people for the
jobs of the future. I
want to make college debt-free
and for families making less
than $125,000, you will not get
a tuition bill from a public
college or university if the
plan that I worked on with
Bernie Sanders
is enacted.
And we're going to work hard to
make sure that it is, because we
are going to go where
the money is. Most of the gains
in the last years since the
Great Recession have gone
to the very top. So we are going
to have the wealthy pay their
fair share. We're going
to have corporations make a
contribution greater than they
are now to our country.
That is a plan that has been
analyzed by independent experts
which said that it could produce
million new jobs. By contrast,
Donald's plan has been analyzed
to conclude it might lose
3.5 million jobs. Why? Because
his whole plan is to cut taxes,
to give the biggest tax breaks
ever to the wealthy and to
corporations, adding $20
trillion to our debt, and
causing the
kind of dislocation that we have
seen before, because it truly
will be trickle-down economics
on steroids.
So the plan I have I think will
actually produce greater
opportunities. The plan he has
will
cost us jobs and possibly lead
to another Great Recession.
WALLACE: Secretary, thank you.
Mr. Trump, why will your plan
create more jobs and growth
than Secretary Clinton's?
TRUMP: Well, first of all,
before I start on my plan, her
plan is going to raise taxes
and even double your taxes. Her
tax plan is a disaster. And she
can say all she wants
about college tuition. And I'm a
big proponent. We're going to do
a lot of things for college
tuition. But the rest of the
public's going to be paying for
it. We will have a massive,
massive tax increase under
Hillary Clinton's plan.
TRUMP: But I'd like to start off
where we left, because when I
said Japan and Germany,
and I'm -- not to single them
out, but South Korea, these are
very rich, powerful countries.
Saudi Arabia, nothing but money.
We protect Saudi Arabia. Why
aren't they paying?
She immediately -- when she
heard this, I questioned it, and
I questioned NATO. Why
aren't the NATO questioned --
why aren't they paying? Because
they weren't paying.
Since I did this -- this was a
year ago -- all of a sudden,
they're paying. And I've been
given a lot -- a lot of credit
for it. All of a sudden, they're
starting to pay up. They
have to pay up. We're protecting
people, they have to pay up. And
I'm a big fan of NATO.
But they have to pay up.
She comes out and said, we love
our allies, we think our allies
are great. Well, it's
awfully hard to get them to pay
up when you have somebody saying
we think how great they
are.
We have to tell Japan in a very
nice way, we have to tell
Germany, all of these countries,
South Korea, we have to say, you
have to help us out. We have,
during his regime, during
President Obama's regime, we've
doubled our national debt. We're
up to $20 trillion.
So my plan -- we're going to
renegotiate trade deals. We're
going to have a lot of free
trade.
We're going to have free trade,
more free trade than we have
right now. But we have
horrible deals. Our jobs are
being taken out by the deal that
her husband signed, NAFTA,
one of the worst deals ever. Our
jobs are being sucked out of our
economy.
You look at all of the places
that I just left, you go to
Pennsylvania, you go to Ohio,
you go to Florida, you go to any
of them. You go upstate New
York. Our jobs have fled
to Mexico and other places.
We're bringing our jobs back.
I am going to renegotiate NAFTA.
And if I can't make a great deal
-- then we're going
to terminate NAFTA and we're
going to create new deals. We're
going to have trade, but
we're going -- we're going to
terminate it, we're going to
make a great trade deal.
And if we can't, we're going to
do it -- we're going to go a
separate way, because it has
been a disaster. We are going to
cut taxes massively. We're going
to cut business taxes
massively. They're going to
start hiring people. We're going
to bring the $2.5 trillion...
WALLACE: Time, Mr. Trump.
TRUMP: ... that's offshore back
into the country. We are going
to start the engine rolling
again,
because...
WALLACE: Mr. Trump?
TRUMP: ... right now, our
country is dying at 1 percent
GDP.
CLINTON: Well, let me translate
that if i can, because
TRUMP: You can't.
CLINTON: ... the fact is, he's
going to advocate for the
largest tax cuts we've ever
seen,
three times more than the tax
cuts under the Bush
administration. I have said
repeatedly
throughout this campaign: I will
not raise taxes on anyone making
$250,000 or less.
I also will not add a penny to
the debt. I have costed out what
I'm going to do. He will,
through his massive tax cuts,
add $20 trillion to the debt.
Well, he mentioned the debt. We
know how to get control of the
debt. When my husband was
president, we went from a $300
billion deficit to a $200
billion surplus and we were
actually
on the path to eliminating the
national debt. When President
Obama came into office, he
inherited the worst economic
disaster since the Great
Depression. He has cut the
deficit
by two-thirds.
So, yes, one of the ways you go
after the debt, one of the ways
you create jobs is by
investing in people. So I do
have investments, investments in
new jobs, investments in
education,
skill training, and the
opportunities for people to get
ahead and stay ahead. That's
the kind of approach
that will work.
WALLACE: Secretary...
CLINTON: Cutting taxes on the
wealthy, we've tried that. It
has not worked the way that
it has been promised.
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton, I
want to pursue your plan,
because in many ways it is
similar
to the Obama stimulus plan in
2009, which has led to the
slowest GDP growth since 1949.
TRUMP: Correct.
WALLACE: Thank you, sir.
You told me in July when we
spoke that the problem is that
President Obama didn't get
to do enough in what he was
trying to do with his stimulus.
So is your plan basically more
-- even more of the
Obama stimulus?
CLINTON: Well, it's a
combination, Chris. And let me
say that when you inherit the
level
of economic catastrophe that
President Obama inherited, it
was a real touch-and-go
situation.
I was in the Senate before I
became secretary of state. I've
never seen people as physically
distraught as the Bush
administration team was because
of what was happening to the
economy.
I personally believe that the
steps that President Obama took
saved the economy. He doesn't
get
the credit he deserves for
taking some very hard positions.
But it was a terrible recession.
So now we've dug ourselves out
of it, we're standing, but we're
not yet running. So what
I am proposing is that we invest
from the middle out and the
ground up, not the top
down. That is not going to work.
That's why what I have put
forward doesn't add a penny to
the debt, but it is the kind
of approach that will enable
more people to take those new
jobs, higher-paying jobs. We're
beginning to see some increase
in incomes, and we certainly
have had a long string of
increasing jobs. We've got to do
more to get the whole economy
moving, and that's what
I believe I will be able to do.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump, even
conservative economists who have
looked at your plan say that the
numbers don't add up, that your
idea, and you've talked about 25
million jobs created,
4 percent...
TRUMP: Over a 10-year period.
WALLACE: ... growth is
unrealistic. And they say -- you
talk a lot about growing the
energy
industry. They say with oil
prices as low as they are right
now, that's unrealistic,
as well. Your response, sir?
TRUMP: So I just left some high
representatives of India.
They're growing at 8 percent.
China
is growing at 7 percent. And
that for them is a
catastrophically low number.
We are growing -- our last
report came out -- and it's
right around the 1 percent
level.
And I think it's going down.
Last week, as you know, the end
of last week, they came
out with an anemic jobs report.
A terrible jobs report. In fact
I said, is that the last
jobs report before the election?
Because if it is, I should win
easily, it was so bad.
The report was so bad.
Look, our country is stagnant.
We've lost our jobs. We've lost
our businesses. We're
not making things anymore,
relatively speaking. Our product
is pouring in from China,
pouring
in from Vietnam, pouring in
from all over the world.
I've visited so many
communities. This has been such
an incredible education for me,
Chris. I've gotten to know so
many -- I've developed so many
friends over the last year.
And they cry when they see
what's happened. I pass
factories that were thriving 20,
years ago, and because of the
bill that her husband signed and
she blessed 100 percent,
it is just horrible what's
happened to these people in
these communities.
Now, she can say that her
husband did well, but, boy, did
they suffer as NAFTA kicked
in, because it didn't really
kick in very much, but it kicked
in after they left. Boy,
did they suffer. That was one of
the worst things that's ever
been signed by our country.
Now she wants to sign
Trans-Pacific Partnership. And
she wants it. She lied when she
said she
didn't call it the gold standard
in one of the debates. She
totally lied. She did call
it the gold standard. And they
actually fact checked, and they
said I was right. I was
so honored.
WALLACE: I want you to give you
a chance to briefly speak to
that, and then I want to
pivot to one-sixth
of the economy...
TRUMP: And that will
be as bad as NAFTA.
WALLACE: ... which is Obamacare.
But go ahead, briefly.
CLINTON: Well, first, let me
say, number one, when I saw the
final agreement for TPP, I
said I was against it. It didn't
meet my test. I've had the same
test. Does it create jobs,
raise incomes, and further our
national security? I'm against
it now. I'll be against it after
the election. I'll be against
it when I'm president.
There's only one of us on this
stage who's actually shipped
jobs to Mexico, because that's
Donald. He's shipped jobs to 12
countries, including Mexico.
But he mentioned China. And, you
know, one of the biggest
problems we have with China
is the illegal dumping of steel
and aluminum into our markets. I
have fought against that
as a senator. I've stood up
against it as secretary of
state.
Donald has bought Chinese steel
and aluminum. In fact, the Trump
Hotel right here in Las
Vegas was made with Chinese
steel. So he goes around with
crocodile tears about how
terrible
it is, but he has given jobs to
Chinese steelworkers, not
American steelworkers.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump?
CLINTON: That's the kind of
approach that is just not going
to work.
TRUMP: Well, let me just
say -- let me just say.
CLINTON: We're going to pull the
country together. We're going to
have trade agreements that
we enforce. That's why I'm going
to have a trade prosecutor for
the first time in history.
And we're going to enforce those
agreements, and we're going to
look for businesses to
help us by buying
American products.
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton?
Go ahead, Mr. Trump.
TRUMP: Let me ask a simple
question. She's been doing this
for 30 years. Why the hell
didn't you do it over
the last 15, 20 years?
CLINTON: No, I voted.
TRUMP: You were very much
involved -- excuse me. My turn.
You were very much involved in
every aspect of this country.
Very much. And you do have
experience. I say the one thing
you have over me is experience,
but it's bad experience, because
what you've done has turned
out badly.
For 30 years, you've been in a
position to help, and if you say
that I use steel or I
use something else, I -- make it
impossible for me to do that. I
wouldn't mind.
The problem is, you talk, but
you don't get anything done,
Hillary. You don't. Just like
when you ran the State
Department, $6 billion was
missing. How do you miss $6
billion? You
ran the State Department, $6
billion was either stolen. They
don't know. It's gone, $6
billion.
If you become president, this
country is going to be in some
mess. Believe me.
CLINTON: Well, first of all,
what he just said about the
State Department is not only
untrue, it's been
debunked numerous times.
CLINTON: But I think it's really
an important issue. He raised
the 30 years of experience,
so let me just talk briefly
about that. You know, back in
the 1970s, I worked for the
Children's Defense Fund. And I
was taking on discrimination
against African-American
kids in schools. He was getting
sued by the Justice Department
for racial discrimination
in his apartment buildings.
In the 1980s, I was working to
reform the schools in Arkansas.
He was borrowing $14
million from his father to start
his businesses. In the 1990s, I
went to Beijing and I said
women's rights are human rights.
He insulted a former Miss
Universe, Alicia Machado, called
her an eating machine.
TRUMP: Give me a break.
CLINTON: And on the day when I
was in the Situation Room,
monitoring the raid that brought
Osama bin Laden to justice, he
was hosting the "Celebrity
Apprentice." So I'm happy to
compare my 30 years of
experience, what I've done for
this country, trying to help in
every
way I could, especially kids and
families get ahead and stay
ahead, with your 30 years,
and I'll let the American
people make that decision.
TRUMP: Well, I think I did a
much better job. I built a
massive company, a great
company,
some of the greatest assets
anywhere in the world, worth
many, many billions of dollars.
I started with a $1 million
loan. I agree with that. It's a
$1 million loan. But I built
a phenomenal company.
And if we could run our country
the way I've run my company, we
would have a country that
you would be so proud of. You
would even be proud of it.
And frankly, when you look at
her real record, take a look at
Syria. Take a look at the
migration.
Take a look at Libya. Take a
look at Iraq. She gave us ISIS,
because her and Obama created
this huge vacuum, and a small
group came out of that huge
vacuum because when -- we should
never have been in Iraq, but
once we were there, we should
have never got out the way
they wanted to get out. She gave
us ISIS as sure as you are
sitting there. And what happened
is now ISIS is in 32 countries.
And now I listen how she's going
to get rid of ISIS.
She's going to get
rid of nobody.
WALLACE: All right. We are going
to get to foreign hot spots in a
few moments, but the
next segment is fitness to be
president of the United States.
Mr. Trump, at the last
debate, you said your talk about
grabbing women was just that,
talk, and that you'd
never actually done it. And
since then, as we all know, nine
women have come forward
and have said that you either
groped them or kissed them
without their consent.
Why would so many different
women from so many different
circumstances over so many
different years, why would they
all in this last couple of weeks
make up -- you deny this
-- why would they all
make up these stories?
Since this is a question for
both of you, Secretary Clinton,
Mr. Trump says what your
husband did and that you
defended was even worse. Mr.
Trump, you go first.
TRUMP: Well, first of all, those
stories have been largely
debunked. Those people -- I
don't
know those people. I have a
feeling how they came. I believe
it was her campaign that did
it.
Just like if you look at what
came out today on the clips
where I was wondering what
happened
with my rally in Chicago and
other rallies where we had such
violence? She's the one
and Obama that caused the
violence. They hired people --
they paid them $1,500, and
they're
on tape saying be violent,
cause fights, do bad things.
I would say the only way --
because those stories are all
totally false, I have to say
that. And I didn't even
apologize to my wife, who's
sitting right here, because I
didn't
do anything. I didn't know any
of these -- I didn't see these
women.
These women -- the woman on the
plane, the -- I think they want
either fame or her campaign
did it. And I think it's her
campaign. Because what I saw
what they did, which is a
criminal
act, by the way, where they're
telling people to go out and
start fist-fights and start
violence.
And I'll tell you what, in
particular in Chicago, people
were hurt and people could have
been
killed in that riot. And that
was now all on tape, started by
her. I believe, Chris,
that she got these people to
step forward. If it wasn't, they
get their 10 minutes of
fame. But they were all totally
-- it was all fiction. It was
lies, and it was fiction.
CLINTON: Well...
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: At the last debate, we
heard Donald talking about what
he did to women. And after
that, a number of women have
come forward saying that's
exactly what he did to them.
Now, what was his response?
Well, he held a number of big
rallies where he said that
he could not possibly have done
those things to those women
because they were not attractive
enough for them to be assaulted.
TRUMP: I did not say that.
I did not say that.
CLINTON: In fact, he went on to
say... WALLACE: Her two minutes
-- sir, her two minutes. Her
two minutes.
TRUMP: I did not say that.
WALLACE: It's her two minutes.
CLINTON: He went on to say,
"Look at her. I don't think so."
About another woman, he
said, "That wouldn't be my first
choice." He attacked the woman
reporter writing the
story, called her "disgusting,"
as he has called a number of
women during this campaign.
Donald thinks belittling women
makes him bigger. He goes after
their dignity, their self-worth,
and I don't think there is a
woman anywhere who doesn't know
what that feels like. So
we now know what Donald thinks
and what he says and how he acts
toward women. That's
who Donald is.
I think it's really up to all of
us to demonstrate who we are and
who our country is, and to
stand up and be very clear about
what we expect from our next
president, how we want to bring
our country together, where we
don't want to have the kind of
pitting of people one
against the other, where instead
we celebrate our diversity, we
lift people up, and we make
our country even greater.
America is great, because
America is good. And it really
is up to all of us to make that
true, now and in the future, and
particularly for our children
and our grandchildren.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump...
TRUMP: Nobody has more respect
for women than I do. Nobody.
(LAUGHTER)
Nobody has more respect...
WALLACE: Please, everybody.
TRUMP: And frankly, those
stories have been largely
debunked. And I really want to
just
talk about something
slightly different.
She mentions this, which is all
fiction, all fictionalized,
probably or possibly started
by her and her very sleazy
campaign. But I will tell you
what isn't fictionalized are
her e-mails, where she destroyed
33,000 e-mails criminally,
criminally, after getting a
subpoena
from the United States Congress.
What happened to the FBI, I
don't know. We have a great
general, four-star general,
today
you read it in all of the
papers, going to potentially
serve five years in jail for
lying
to the FBI. One lie. She's lied
hundreds of times to the people,
to Congress, and to the
FBI. He's going to probably go
to jail. This is a four-star
general. And she gets away
with it, and she can run for the
presidency of the United States?
That's really what you
should be talking about, not
fiction, where somebody wants
fame or where they come out
of her crooked campaign.
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: Well, every time Donald
is pushed on something which is
obviously uncomfortable,
like what these women are
saying, he immediately goes to
denying responsibility. And it's
not
just about women. He never
apologizes or says he's sorry
for anything.
So we know what he has said and
what he's done to women. But he
also went after a disabled
reporter, mocked and mimicked
him on national television.
TRUMP: Wrong.
CLINTON: He went after Mr. and
Mrs. Khan, the parents of a
young man who died serving
our country, a Gold Star family,
because of their religion. He
went after John McCain,
a prisoner of war, said he
prefers "people who aren't
captured." He went after a
federal
judge, born in Indiana, but who
Donald said couldn't be trusted
to try the fraud and
racketeering
case against Trump University
because his parents were
Mexican.
So it's not one thing. This is a
pattern, a pattern of
divisiveness, of a very dark
and in many ways dangerous
vision of our country, where he
incites violence, where he
applauds
people who are pushing and
pulling and punching at his
rallies. That is not who America
is.
And I hope that as we move in
the last weeks of this campaign,
more and more people will
understand what's at stake in
this election. It really does
come down to what kind of
country
we are going to have.
TRUMP: So sad when she talks
about violence at my rallies,
and she caused the violence.
It's on tape.
WALLACE: During the last...
TRUMP: The other things are
false, but honestly, I'd love to
talk about getting rid of ISIS,
and I'd love to talk
about other things...
WALLACE: OK.
TRUMP: ... but those other
charges, as she knows, are
false.
WALLACE: In this bucket about
fitness to be president, there's
been a lot of developments
over the last 10 days since the
last debate. I'd like to ask you
about them. These are
questions that the
American people have.
Secretary Clinton, during your
2009 Senate confirmation
hearing, you promised to avoid
even the appearance of a
conflict of interest with your
dealing with the Clinton
Foundation
while you were secretary of
state, but e-mails show that
donors got special access to
you.
Those seeking grants for Haiti
relief were considered
separately from non-donors, and
some of those donors got
contracts, government contracts,
taxpayer money.
Can you really say that you kept
your pledge to that Senate
committee? And why isn't what
happened and what went on
between you and the Clinton
Foundation, why isn't it what
Mr. Trump calls pay to play?
CLINTON: Well, everything I did
as secretary of state was in
furtherance of our country's
interests and our values. The
State Department has said that.
I think that's been proven.
But I am happy, in fact I'm
thrilled to talk about the
Clinton Foundation, because it
is
a world-renowned charity and I
am so proud of the work that it
does. You know, I could
talk for the rest of the debate
-- I know I don't have the time
to do that.
But just briefly, the Clinton
Foundation made it possible for
11 million people around the
world with HIV-AIDS to afford
treatment, and that's about half
all the people in the world
who are getting treatment. In
partnership with the American
Health Association...
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton...
CLINTON: ... we have made
environments in schools
healthier for kids, including
healthier
lunches...
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton,
respectfully, this is -- this is
an open discussion.
CLINTON: Well, it is an
open discussion. And you...
WALLACE: And the specific
question went to pay for play.
Do you want to talk about that?
CLINTON: Well, but there is no
-- but there is no evidence --
but there is...
(CROSSTALK)
TRUMP: I think that
it's been very well...
WALLACE: Let's ask Mr. Trump.
CLINTON: There is a lot of
evidence about the very good
work...
TRUMP: It's been
very well studied.
CLINTON: ... and the
high rankings...
(CROSSTALK)
WALLACE: Please let
me Mr. Trump speak.
TRUMP: ... and it's a criminal
enterprise, and so many people
know it.
WALLACE: Please let
Mr. Trump speak.
(CROSSTALK)
TRUMP: It's a criminal
enterprise. Saudi Arabia giving
$25 million, Qatar, all of these
countries.
You talk about women and women's
rights? So these are people that
push gays off business
-- off buildings. These are
people that kill women and treat
women horribly. And yet you
take their money.
So I'd like to ask you right
now, why don't you give back the
money that you've taken
from certain countries that
treat certain groups of people
so horribly? Why don't you
give back the money? I think
it would be a great gesture.
Because she takes a tremendous
amount of money. And you take a
look at the people of Haiti.
I was at a little Haiti the
other day in Florida. And I want
to tell you, they hate the
Clintons,
because what's happened in Haiti
with the Clinton Foundation is a
disgrace. And you
know it, and they know it,
and everybody knows it.
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: Well, very quickly, we
at the Clinton Foundation spend
90 percent -- 90 percent
of all the money that is donated
on behalf of programs of people
around the world and
in our own country. I'm very
proud of that. We have the
highest rating from the
watchdogs
that follow foundations. And I'd
be happy to compare what we do
with the Trump Foundation,
which took money from other
people and bought a six- foot
portrait of Donald. I mean, who
does that? It just
was astonishing.
But when it comes to Haiti,
Haiti is the poorest country in
our hemisphere. The earthquake
and the hurricanes, it has
devastated Haiti. Bill and I
have been involved in trying to
help Haiti for many years. The
Clinton Foundation raised $30
million to help Haiti after the
catastrophic earthquake and all
of the terrible problems the
people there had.
We have done things to help
small businesses, agriculture,
and so much else. And we're
going
to keep working to help Haiti...
WALLACE: All right.
CLINTON: ... because it's an
important part of the American
experience.
TRUMP: They don't want you
to help them anymore.
(CROSSTALK)
TRUMP: I'd like to mention one
thing. Trump Foundation, small
foundation. People contribute,
I contribute. The money goes 100
percent -- 100 percent goes to
different charities, including
a lot of military. I don't get
anything. I don't buy boats. I
don't buy planes. What
happens -- the money
goes to them.
WALLACE: Wasn't some of the
money used to settle your
lawsuits, sir?
TRUMP: No, it was -- we put up
the American flag. And that's
it. They put up the American
flag. We fought for the right in
Palm Beach to put up the
American flag.
WALLACE: Right. But there was a
penalty that was imposed by Palm
Beach County, and the
money came from
your foundation...
TRUMP: There was. There
was. And, by the way...
WALLACE: ... instead of
Mar-a-Lago or yourself, sir.
TRUMP: ... the money -- the
money went to Fisher House,
where they build houses -- the
money that you're talking about
went to Fisher House, where they
build houses for veterans
and disabled vets.
WALLACE: I want to
get into one...
CLINTON: But, of course, there's
no way we can know whether any
of that is true, because
he hasn't released his tax
returns. He is the first
candidate ever to run for
president
in the last 40-plus years who
has not released his tax
returns, so everything he says
about
charity or anything else, we
can't prove it. You can look at
our tax returns. We've got
them all out there.
But what is really troubling is
that we learned in the last
debate he has not paid a penny
in federal income tax. And we
were talking about immigrants a
few minutes ago, Chris.
You know, half of all immigrants
-- undocumented immigrants in
our country -- actually pay
federal income tax. So we have
undocumented immigrants in
America who are paying more
federal income tax than a
billionaire. I find that just
astonishing.
WALLACE: I want...
TRUMP: So let me just tell you
very quickly, we're entitled
because of the laws that people
like her passed to take massive
amounts of depreciation on other
charges, and we do it.
And all of her donors -- just
about all of them -- I know
Buffett took hundreds of
millions
of dollars, Soros, George Soros,
took hundreds of millions of
dollars...
WALLACE: We...
TRUMP: Let me just explain.
WALLACE: But, no,
we heard this...
TRUMP: Most of her donors have
done the same thing as I do.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump, we -- OK.
TRUMP: You know what
she should have done?
WALLACE: Folks, we heard this...
TRUMP: And you know, Hillary,
what you should have done, you
should have changed the law
when you were a United
States senator...
WALLACE: Folks, we heard this...
TRUMP: ... because your donors
and your special interests are
doing the same thing as I do,
except even more so.
CLINTON: Well, you know...
TRUMP: You should have changed
the law. But you won't change
the law, because you take
in so much money. I mean, I sat
in my apartment today on a very
beautiful hotel down the street
known as Trump...
CLINTON: Made with
Chinese steel.
TRUMP: But I will tell
you, I sat there...
(LAUGHTER)
... I sat there watching ad
after ad after ad, false ad. All
paid for by your friends
on Wall Street that gave so much
money because they know you're
going to protect them. And,
frankly, you should
have changed the laws.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump...
TRUMP: If you don't like what I
did, you should have changed the
laws.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump, I want to
ask you about one last question
in this topic. You have
been warning at rallies recently
that this election is rigged and
that Hillary Clinton
is in the process of trying
to steal it from you.
Your running mate, Governor
Pence, pledged on Sunday that he
and you -- his words -- "will
absolutely accept the result of
this election." Today your
daughter, Ivanka, said the same
thing. I want to ask you here on
the stage tonight: Do you make
the same commitment that
you will absolutely -- sir, that
you will absolutely accept the
result of this election?
TRUMP: I will look at it at the
time. I'm not looking at
anything now. I'll look at
it at the time.
What I've seen -- what I've seen
is so bad. First of all, the
media is so dishonest and
so corrupt, and the pile-on is
so amazing. The New York Times
actually wrote an article
about it, but they don't even
care. It's so dishonest. And
they've poisoned the mind of
the voters.
But unfortunately for them, I
think the voters are seeing
through it. I think they're
going
to see through it. We'll find
out on November 8th. But I think
they're going to see through
it.
WALLACE: But, sir, there's...
TRUMP: If you look -- excuse me,
Chris -- if you look at your
voter rolls, you will see
millions of people that are
registered to vote -- millions,
this isn't coming from me
-- this is coming from Pew
Report and other places --
millions of people that are
registered
to vote that shouldn't
be registered to vote.
So let me just give you one
other thing. So I talk about the
corrupt media. I talk about
the millions of people -- tell
you one other thing. She
shouldn't be allowed to run.
It's
crooked -- she's -- she's guilty
of a very, very serious crime.
She should not be allowed
to run.
And just in that respect, I say
it's rigged, because she should
never...
WALLACE: But...
TRUMP: Chris, she should never
have been allowed to run for the
presidency based on what she
did with e-mails and
so many other things.
WALLACE: But, sir, there is a
tradition in this country -- in
fact, one of the prides
of this country -- is the
peaceful transition of power and
that no matter how hard-fought
a campaign is, that at the end
of the campaign that the loser
concedes to the winner. Not
saying that you're necessarily
going to be the loser or the
winner, but that the loser
concedes to the winner and that
the country comes together in
part for the good of the
country. Are you saying you're
not prepared now to commit to
that principle?
TRUMP: What I'm saying is that I
will tell you at the time. I'll
keep you in suspense.
OK?
CLINTON: Well, Chris, let me
respond to that, because that's
horrifying. You know, every
time Donald thinks things are
not going in his direction, he
claims whatever it is, is
rigged against him.
The FBI conducted a year-long
investigation into my e-mails.
They concluded there was
no case; he said the FBI was
rigged. He lost the Iowa caucus.
He lost the Wisconsin primary.
He said the Republican primary
was rigged against him. Then
Trump University gets sued
for fraud and racketeering; he
claims the court system and the
federal judge is rigged
against him. There was even a
time when he didn't get an Emmy
for his TV program three
years in a row and he started
tweeting that the Emmys were
rigged against him.
TRUMP: Should have gotten it.
(LAUGHTER)
CLINTON: This is -- this is a
mindset. This is how Donald
thinks. And it's funny, but
it's also really troubling.
WALLACE: OK.
CLINTON: So that is not the way
our democracy works. We've been
around for 240 years. We've
had free and fair elections.
We've accepted the outcomes when
we may not have liked them.
And that is what must be
expected of anyone standing on a
debate stage during a general
election. You know, President
Obama said the other day when
you're whining before the game
is even finished...
(APPLAUSE)
WALLACE: Hold on. Hold on,
folks. Hold on, folks.
CLINTON: ... it just shows
you're not up to doing the job.
And let's -- you know, let's
be clear about what he is saying
and what that means. He is
denigrating -- he's talking
down our democracy. And I, for
one, am appalled that somebody
who is the nominee of one of
our two major parties would
take that kind of position.
TRUMP: I think what the FBI did
and what the Department of
Justice did, including meeting
with her husband, the attorney
general, in the back of an
airplane on the tarmac in
Arizona,
I think it's disgraceful.
I think it's a disgrace.
WALLACE: All right.
TRUMP: I think we've never had a
situation so bad in this
country.
(APPLAUSE)
WALLACE: Hold on, folks. This
doesn't do any good for anyone.
Let's please continue the
debate, and let's move on to the
subject of foreign hot spots.
The Iraqi offensive to take back
Mosul has begun. If they are
successful in pushing ISIS
out of that city and out of all
of Iraq, the question then
becomes, what happens the day
after? And that's something that
whichever of you ends up --
whoever of you ends up as
president is going
to have to confront.
Will you put U.S. troops into
that vacuum to make sure that
ISIS doesn't come back or
isn't replaced by something even
worse? Secretary Clinton, you go
first in this segment. You
have two minutes.
CLINTON: Well, I am encouraged
that there is an effort led by
the Iraqi army, supported
by Kurdish forces, and also
given the help and advice from
the number of special forces
and other Americans on the
ground. But I will not support
putting American soldiers into
Iraq as an occupying force. I
don't think that is in our
interest, and I don't think
that would be smart to do. In
fact, Chris, I think that would
be a big red flag waving
for ISIS to reconstitute itself.
The goal here is to take back
Mosul. It's going to be a hard
fight. I've got no illusions
about that. And then continue to
press into Syria to begin to
take back and move on Raqqa,
which is the ISIS headquarters.
I am hopeful that the hard work
that American military advisers
have done will pay off and
that we will see a real -- a
really successful military
operation. But we know we've got
lots of work to do. Syria will
remain a hotbed of terrorism as
long as the civil war, aided
and abetted by the Iranians
and the Russians, continue.
So I have said, look, we need to
keep our eye on ISIS. That's why
I want to have an
intelligence surge that protects
us here at home, why we have to
go after them from the
air, on the ground, online, why
we have to make sure here at
home we don't let terrorists
buy weapons. If you're too
dangerous to fly, you're too
dangerous to buy a gun.
And I'm going to continue to
push for a no-fly zone and safe
havens within Syria not only
to help protect the Syrians and
prevent the constant outflow of
refugees, but to, frankly,
gain some leverage on both the
Syrian government and the
Russians so that perhaps we can
have
the kind of serious negotiation
necessary to bring the conflict
to an end and go forward
on a political track.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump, same
question. If we are able to push
ISIS out of Mosul and out of
Iraq, will -- would you be
willing to put U.S. troops in
there to prevent their return
or something else?
TRUMP: Let me tell you, Mosul is
so sad. We had Mosul. But when
she left, when she took
everybody out, we lost Mosul.
Now we're fighting again to get
Mosul. The problem with Mosul
and what they wanted to do is
they wanted to get the leaders
of ISIS who they felt were
in Mosul.
About three months ago, I
started reading that they want
to get the leaders and they're
going to attack Mosul. Whatever
happened to the element of
surprise, OK? We announce we're
going after Mosul. I have been
reading about going after Mosul
now for about -- how long
is it, Hillary, three months?
These people have all left.
They've all left.
The element of surprise. Douglas
MacArthur, George Patton
spinning in their graves when
they see the stupidity of our
country. So we're now fighting
for Mosul, that we had.
All she had to do was stay
there, and now we're going in to
get it.
But you know who the big winner
in Mosul is going to be after we
eventually get it? And
the only reason they did it is
because she's running for the
office of president and they
want to look tough. They want to
look good. He violated the red
line in the sand, and
he made so many mistakes, made
all the mistakes. That's why we
have the great migration. But
she wanted to look good for the
election. So they're going in.
But who's going to get Mosul,
really? We'll take Mosul
eventually. But the way -- if
you
look at what's happening, much
tougher than they thought. Much,
much tougher. Much more
dangerous. Going to be more
deaths that they thought.
But the leaders that we wanted
to get are all gone because
they're smart. They say,
what do we need this for? So
Mosul is going to be a wonderful
thing. And Iran should write
us a letter of thank you, just
like the really stupid -- the
stupidest deal of all time,
a deal that's going to give Iran
absolutely nuclear weapons. Iran
should write us yet
another letter saying thank you
very much, because Iran, as I
said many years ago, Iran
is taking over Iraq, something
they've wanted to do forever,
but we've made it so easy for
them.
So we're now going to take
Mosul. And do you know who's
going to be the beneficiary?
Iran.
Oh, yeah, they're making -- I
mean, they are outsmarting --
look, you're not there, you
might be involved in that
decision. But you were there
when you took everybody out of
Mosul and out of Iraq. You
shouldn't have been in Iraq, but
you did vote for it. You
once you were in Iraq, you
should have never left the
way.
WALLACE: Sir, your
two minutes are up.
TRUMP: The point is, the big
winner is going to be Iran.
CLINTON: Well, you know, once
again, Donald is implying that
he didn't support the invasion
of Iraq. I said it was a
mistake. I've said that years
ago. He has consistently denied
what is...
TRUMP: Wrong.
CLINTON: ... a very
clear fact that...
TRUMP: Wrong.
CLINTON: ... before the
invasion, he supported it. And,
you know, I just want everybody
to
go Google it. Google "Donald
Trump Iraq." And you will see
the dozens of sources which
verify that he was for
the invasion of Iraq.
TRUMP: Wrong.
CLINTON: And you can actually
hear the audio of him saying
that. Now, why does that matter?
Well, it matters because he has
not told the truth about that
position. I guess he believes
it makes him look better now to
contrast with me because I did
vote for it.
But what's really important here
is to understand all the
interplay. Mosul is a Sunni
city.
Mosul is on the border of Syria.
And, yes, we do need to go after
Baghdadi, and -- just
like we went after bin Laden,
while you were doing "Celebrity
Apprentice," and we brought
him to justice. We need to
go after the leadership.
But we need to get rid of them,
get rid of their fighters. There
are an estimated several
thousand fighters in Mosul.
They've been digging
underground. They've been
prepared to defend.
It's going to be tough fighting.
But I think we can take back
Mosul, and then we can move
on into Syria and
take back Raqqa.
This is what we have to do. I'm
just amazed that he seems to
think that the Iraqi government
and our allies and everybody
else launched the attack on
Mosul to help me in this
election,
but that's how Donald thinks.
You know, he always is looking
for some conspiracy.
TRUMP: Chris, we
don't gain anything.
CLINTON: He has all the
conspiracy theories...
(CROSSTALK)
TRUMP: Iran is taking over Iraq.
WALLACE: Secretary
Clinton, it's...
(CROSSTALK)
TRUMP: Iran is taking over
Iraq. We don't gain anything.
CLINTON: This conspiracy theory,
which he's been spewing out for
quite some time.
TRUMP: If they did
it by surprise...
(CROSSTALK)
WALLACE: Wait, wait, wait,
Secretary Clinton, it's an open
discussion.
CLINTON: He says...
(CROSSTALK)
TRUMP: We could have gained
if they did it by surprise.
WALLACE: Secretary, please
let Mr. Trump speak.
CLINTON: ... unfit, and he
proves it every time he talks.
TRUMP: No, you are the one
that's unfit. You know,
WikiLeaks just actually came out
-- John
Podesta said some horrible
things about you, and, boy, was
he right. He said some beauties.
And you know, Bernie Sanders, he
said you have bad judgment. You
do.
And if you think that going into
Mosul after we let the world
know we're going in, and
all of the people that we really
wanted -- the leaders -- they're
all gone. If you think
that was good, then you do. Now,
John Podesta said you have
terrible instincts. Bernie
Sanders
said you have bad judgment.
I agree with both.
CLINTON: Well, you should ask
Bernie Sanders who he's
supporting for president. And he
has said...
TRUMP: Which is a big mistake.
CLINTON: ... as he has
campaigned for me around the
country, you are the most
dangerous person
to run for president in the
modern history of America. I
think he's right.
WALLACE: Let's turn to Aleppo.
Mr. Trump, in the last debate,
you were both asked about
the situation in the Syrian city
of Aleppo. And I want to follow
up on that, because you
said several things in that
debate which were not true, sir.
You said that Aleppo has
basically
fallen. In fact, there -- in
fact, there are... TRUMP: It's a
catastrophe. I mean...
WALLACE: It's a
catastrophe, but there...
TRUMP: ... it's a mess.
WALLACE: There are
a quarter of...
TRUMP: Have you seen
it? Have you seen it?
WALLACE: Sir...
TRUMP: Have you seen what's
happening to Aleppo?
WALLACE: Sir, if I may
finish my question...
TRUMP: OK, so it hasn't
fallen. Take a look at it.
WALLACE: Well, there are a
quarter of a million people
still living there and being
slaughtered.
TRUMP: That's right. And they
are being slaughtered...
WALLACE: Yes.
TRUMP: ... because
of bad decisions.
WALLACE: If I may just finish
here, and you also said that --
that Syria and Russia are
busy fighting ISIS. In fact,
they have been the ones who've
been bombing and shelling
eastern Aleppo, and they just
announced a humanitarian pause,
in effect, admitting that
they have been bombing and
shelling Aleppo. Would you like
to clear that up, sir?
TRUMP: Well, Aleppo is a
disaster. It's a humanitarian
nightmare. But it has fallen
from the -- from any standpoint.
I mean, what do you need, a
signed document? Take a look
at Aleppo. It is so sad when
you see what's happened.
And a lot of this is because of
Hillary Clinton, because what's
happened is, by fighting Assad,
who turned out to be a lot
tougher than she thought, and
now she's going to say, oh, he
loves Assad, she's -- he's just
much tougher and much smarter
than her and Obama. And everyone
thought he was gone two years
ago, three years ago. He -- he
aligned with Russia.
He now also aligned with Iran,
who we made very powerful. We
gave them $150 billion back.
We give them $1.7 billion in
cash. I mean, cash. Bundles of
cash as big as this stage.
We gave them $1.7 billion.
Now they have -- he has aligned
with Russia and with Iran. They
don't want ISIS, but they
have other things, because we're
backing -- we're backing rebels.
We don't know who the rebels
are. We're giving them lots of
money, lots of everything. We
don't know who the rebels
are. And when and if -- and it's
not going to happen, because you
have Russia and you
have Iran now. But if they ever
did overthrow Assad, you might
end up with -- as bad as
Assad is, and he's a bad guy,
but you may very well end up
with worse than Assad.
If she did nothing, we'd be in
much better shape. And this is
what's caused the great
migration, where she's taking in
tens of thousands of Syrian
refugees, who probably in many
cases
-- not probably, who
are definitely...
WALLACE: Let me...
TRUMP: ... in many cases,
ISIS-aligned, and we now have
them in our country, and wait
until you see -- this is going
to be the great Trojan horse.
And wait until you see what
happens in the coming years.
Lots of luck, Hillary. Thanks a
lot for doing a great job.
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton, you
have talked about -- and in the
last debate and again
today -- that you would impose a
no-fly zone to try to protect
the people of Aleppo and
to stop the killing there.
President Obama has refused to
do that because he fears it's
going to draw us closer or
deeper into the conflict.
And General Joseph Dunford, the
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, says you impose
a no-fly zone, chances are
you're going to get into a war
-- his words -- with Syria
and Russia. So the question I
have is, if you impose a no-fly
zone -- first of all,
how do you respond to their
concerns? Secondly, if you
impose a no-fly zone and a
Russian
plane violates that, does
President Clinton shoot that
plane down?
CLINTON: Well, Chris, first of
all, I think a no-fly zone could
save lives and could hasten
the end of the conflict. I'm
well aware of the really
legitimate concerns that you
have
expressed from both the
president and the general.
This would not be done just on
the first day. This would take a
lot of negotiation. And
it would also take making it
clear to the Russians and the
Syrians that our purpose
here was to provide safe
zones on the ground.
We've had millions of people
leave Syria and those millions
of people inside Syria who
have been dislocated. So I think
we could strike a deal and make
it very clear to the
Russians and the Syrians that
this was something that we
believe was in the best
interests
of the people on the ground in
Syria, it would help us with our
fight against ISIS.
But I want to respond to what
Donald said about refugees. He's
made these claims repeatedly.
I am not going to let anyone
into this country who is not
vetted, who we do not have
confidence
in. But I am not going to slam
the door on women and children.
That picture of that little
4-year-old boy in Aleppo, with
the blood coming down his face
while he sat in an ambulance,
is haunting. And so we are going
to do very careful, thorough
vetting. That does not solve
our internal challenges with
ISIS and our need to stop
radicalization, to work with
American Muslim communities who
are on the front lines to
identify and prevent attacks.
In fact, the killer of the
dozens of people at the
nightclub in Orlando, the Pulse
nightclub,
was born in Queens, the same
place Donald was born. So let's
be clear about what the
threat is and how we are best
going to be able to meet it.
And, yes, some of that threat
emanates from over in Syria and
Iraq, and we've got to keep
fighting, and I will defeat
ISIS, and some of it is we have
to up our game and be much
smarter here at home.
WALLACE: Folks, I want to
get into our final segment.
TRUMP: But I just have to...
WALLACE: Real quick.
TRUMP: It's so ridiculous what
she -- she will defeat ISIS. We
should have never let
ISIS happen in the first place.
And right now, they're in 32
countries.
WALLACE: OK.
TRUMP: We should have -- wait
one second. They had a
cease-fire three weeks ago. A
cease-fire,
the United States, Russia, and
Syria. And during the
cease-fire, Russia took over
vast
swatches of land, and then they
said we don't want the
cease-fire anymore.
We are so outplayed on missiles,
on cease-fires. They are
outplayed. Now, she wasn't
there.
I assume she had nothing to do
with it. But our country is so
outplayed by Putin and Assad,
and by the way -- and by Iran.
Nobody can believe how stupid
our leadership is.
WALLACE: Mr. Trump, Secretary
Clinton -- no, we need to move
on to our final segment, and
that is the national debt, which
has not been discussed until
tonight.
Our national debt, as a share of
the economy, our GDP, is now 77
percent. That's the highest
since just after World War II.
But the nonpartisan Committee
for a Responsible Federal Budget
says, Secretary Clinton, under
your plan, debt would rise to 86
percent of GDP over
the next 10 years. Mr. Trump,
under your plan, they say it
would rise to 105 percent of GDP
over the next 10 years. The
question is, why are both of you
ignoring this problem? Mr.
Trump, you go first.
TRUMP: Well, I say they're
wrong, because I'm going to
create tremendous jobs. And
we're
bringing GDP from, really, 1
percent, which is what it is
now, and if she got in, it will
be less than zero. But we're
bringing it from 1 percent up to
4 percent. And I actually
think we can go higher than 4
percent. I think you can go to 5
percent or 6 percent. And
if we do, you don't have to
bother asking your question,
because we have a tremendous
machine. We will have created a
tremendous economic machine once
again. To do that, we're
taking back jobs. We're not
going to let our companies be
raided by other countries where
we lose all our jobs, we don't
make our product anymore. It's
very sad. But I'm going to
create
a -- the kind of a country that
we were from the standpoint of
industry. We used to be
there. We've given it up. We've
become very, very sloppy.
We've had people that are
political hacks making the
biggest deals in the world,
bigger
than companies. You take these
big companies, these trade deals
are far bigger than these
companies, and yet we don't use
our great leaders, many of whom
back me and many of
whom back Hillary, I must say.
But we don't use those people.
Those are the people -- these
are the greatest negotiators in
the world. We have the greatest
businesspeople in the
world. We have to use them to
negotiate our trade deals.
We use political hacks. We use
people that get the position
because they gave -- they
made a campaign contribution and
they're dealing with China and
people that are very much
smarter
than they are. So we have
to use our great people.
But that being said, we will
create an economic machine the
likes of which we haven't seen
in many decades. And people,
Chris, will again go back to
work and they'll make a lot of
money. And we'll have companies
that will grow and expand and
start from new.
WALLACE: Secretary Clinton?
CLINTON: Well, first, when I
hear Donald talk like that and
know that his slogan is "Make
America Great Again," I wonder
when he thought America was
great. And before he rushes and
says, "You know, before you and
President Obama were there," I
think it's important
to recognize that he has been
criticizing our government for
decades.
You know, back in 1987, he took
out a $100,000 ad in the New
York Times, during the time
when President Reagan was
president, and basically said
exactly what he just said now,
that we
were the laughingstock of the
world. He was criticizing
President Reagan. This is the
way Donald thinks about himself,
puts himself into, you know, the
middle and says, "You
know, I alone can fix it," as he
said on the convention stage.
But if you look at the debt,
which is the issue you asked
about, Chris, I pay for
everything
I'm proposing. I do not add a
penny to the national debt. I
take that very seriously,
because I do think it's one of
the issues we've got to come to
grips with.
So when I talk about how we're
going to pay for education, how
we're going to invest in
infrastructure, how we're going
to get the cost of prescription
drugs down, and a lot
of the other issues that people
talk to me about all the time,
I've made it very clear
we are going where the money is.
We are going to ask the wealthy
and corporations to pay
their fair share.
And there is no evidence
whatsoever that that will slow
down or diminish our growth. In
fact, I think just the opposite.
We'll have what economists call
middle-out growth. We've
got to get back to rebuilding
the middle class, the families
of America. That's where growth
will come from. That's why I
want to invest in you. I want to
invest in your family.
And I think that's the smartest
way to grow the economy, to make
the economy fairer. And
we just have a big disagreement
about this. It may be because of
our experiences. You
know, he started off with
his dad as a millionaire...
TRUMP: Yeah, yeah, we've heard
-- we've heard this before,
Hillary.
CLINTON: I started off with --
my dad was a small-business man.
TRUMP: We've heard this before.
CLINTON: And I think it -- you
know, it's a difference that
affects how we see the world
and what we want to
do with the economy.
WALLACE: Time.
TRUMP: Thank you, Hillary.
Could I just respond?
WALLACE: Well, no, sir, because
we're running out of time...
TRUMP: Because I did disagree
with Ronald Reagan very strongly
on trade. I disagreed
with him. We should have been
much tougher on trade even then.
I've been waiting for
years. Nobody does it right.
WALLACE: OK.
TRUMP: And frankly, now
we're going to do it right.
WALLACE: All right. The one last
area I want to get into with you
in this debate is the
fact that the biggest driver of
our debt is entitlements, which
is 60 percent of all federal
spending. Now, the Committee for
federal -- a Responsible Federal
Budget has looked at both
of your plans and they say
neither of you has a serious
plan that is going to solve
the fact that Medicare's going
to run out of money in the
2020s, Social Security is
going to run out of money in the
2030s, and at that time,
recipients are going to take
huge cuts in their benefits.
So, in effect, the final
question I want to ask you in
this regard is -- and let me
start
with you, Mr. Trump, would
President Trump make a deal to
save Medicare and Social
Security
that included both tax increases
and benefit cuts, in effect, a
grand bargain on entitlements?
TRUMP: I'm cutting taxes. We're
going to grow the economy. It's
going to grow at a record
rate of growth.
WALLACE: That's not going to
help in the entitlements.
TRUMP: No, it's going to totally
help you. And one thing we have
to do: Repeal and replace
the disaster known as Obamacare.
It's destroying our country.
It's destroying our businesses,
our small business and our big
businesses. We have to repeal
and replace Obamacare.
You take a look at the kind of
numbers that that will cost us
in the year '17, it is a
disaster. If we don't repeal and
replace -- now, it's probably
going to die of its own weight.
But Obamacare has to go. It's --
the premiums are going up 60
percent, 70 percent, 80 percent.
Next year they're going to
go up over 100 percent.
And I'm really glad that the
premiums have started -- at
least the people see what's
happening, because she wants to
keep Obamacare and she wants to
make it even worse, and it
can't get any worse. Bad health
care at the most expensive
price. We have to repeal and
replace Obamacare.
WALLACE: And, Secretary Clinton,
same question, because at this
point, Social Security and
Medicare are going to run out,
the trust funds are going to run
out of money. Will you as
president entertain -- will you
consider a grand bargain, a deal
that includes both tax
increases and benefit cuts to
try to save both programs?
CLINTON: Well, Chris, I am on
record as saying that we need to
put more money into the Social
Security Trust Fund. That's part
of my commitment to raise taxes
on the wealthy. My Social
Security
payroll contribution will go up,
as will Donald's, assuming he
can't figure out how to get out
of it. But what we want to do is
to replenish the Social Security
Trust Fund...
TRUMP: Such a nasty woman.
CLINTON: ... by making sure that
we have sufficient resources,
and that will come from either
raising the cap and/or finding
other ways to get more money
into it. I will not cut
benefits. I want to enhance
benefits for low-income workers
and for women who have been
disadvantaged
by the current Social
Security system.
But what Donald is proposing
with these massive tax cuts will
result in a $20 trillion
additional
national debt. That will have
dire consequences for Social
Security and Medicare.
And I'll say something about the
Affordable Care Act, which he
wants to repeal. The Affordable
Care Act extended the solvency
of the Medicare Trust Fund. So
if repeals it, our Medicare
problem gets worse. What we
need to do is go after...
TRUMP: Your husband
disagrees with you.
CLINTON: ... the long-term
health care drivers. We've got
to get costs down, increase
value,
emphasize wellness. I have a
plan for doing that. And I think
that we will be able to
get entitlement spending under
control by with more resources
and harder decisions.
WALLACE: This is -- this is the
final time, probably to both of
your delight, that you're
going to be on a stage together
in this campaign. I would like
to end it on a positive note.
You had not agreed to closing
statements, but it seems to me
in a funny way that might
make it more interesting because
you haven't prepared closing
statements.
So I'd like you each to take --
and we're going to put a clock
up, a minute, as the
final question in the final
debate, to tell the American
people why they should elect
you to be the next president.
This is another new
mini-segment. Secretary Clinton,
it's
your turn to go first.
CLINTON: Well, I would like to
say to everyone watching tonight
that I'm reaching out to
all Americans -- Democrats,
Republicans, and independents --
because we need everybody
to help make our country what it
should be, to grow the economy,
to make it fairer, to
make it work for everyone. We
need your talents, your skills,
your commitments, your energy,
your ambition.
You know, I've been privileged
to see the presidency up close.
And I know the awesome
responsibility of protecting our
country and the incredible
opportunity of working to try
to make life better for all of
you. I have made the cause of
children and families really
my life's work.
That's what my mission will be
in the presidency. I will stand
up for families against powerful
interests, against corporations.
I will do everything that I can
to make sure that you
have good jobs, with rising
incomes, that your kids have
good educations from preschool
through college. I hope you will
give me a chance to serve as
your president.
WALLACE: Secretary
Clinton, thank you.
Mr. Trump?
TRUMP: She's raising the money
from the people she wants to
control. Doesn't work that way.
But when I started this
campaign, I started it very
strongly. It's called "Make
America
Great Again." We're going to
make America great. We have a
depleted military. It has
to be helped, has to be fixed.
We have the greatest people on
Earth in our military.
We don't take care of our
veterans. We take care of
illegal immigrants, people that
come
into the country illegally,
better than we take care of our
vets. That can't happen.
Our policemen and women are
disrespected. We need law and
order, but we need justice,
too. Our inner cities are a
disaster. You get shot walking
to the store. They have no
education. They have no jobs. I
will do more for
African-Americans and Latinos
than she
can ever do in 10 lifetimes.
All she's done is talk to the
African-Americans and to the
Latinos, but they get the vote,
and then they come back, they
say, we'll see you in four
years. We are going to make
America
strong again, and we are going
to make America great again, and
it has to start now. We cannot
take four more years of Barack
Obama, and that's what you get
when you get her.
5-Minute Fix newsletter Keeping
up with politics is easy now.
Sign up WALLACE: Thank you both.
(APPLAUSE)
Secretary Clinton -- hold on
just a moment, folks. Secretary
Clinton, Mr. Trump, I want
to thank you both for
participating in all three of
these debates.
That brings to an end this
year's debates sponsored by the
Commission on Presidential
Debates. We want to thank the
University of Nevada, Las Vegas,
and its students for having
us. Now the decision
is up to you.
While millions have already
voted, Election Day, November
8th, is just 20 days away. One
thing everyone here can agree
on: We hope you will go vote. It
is one of the honors
and obligations of living in
this great country. Thank you,
and good night.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that wraps up
the final presidential debate
between Donald Trump and
Hillary Clinton, as we watch the
candidates walk across the stage
to shake the hand of
the moderator, Chris Wallace,
and presumably their families
will join them on stage in
a moment.
Joining me here in our
Washington studio, syndicated
columnist Mark Shields, New York
Times columnist David Brooks,
and Amy Walter of The Cook
Political Report.
David Brooks, it started out on
a civil note. That lasted about
15 or 20 minutes. Then they
got into I can think a number of
subjects around abortion and the
Supreme Court.
But, by the end of it, Donald
Trump was calling Hillary
Clinton a nasty woman and a
liar.
And we heard a lot.
DAVID BROOKS: I counted 27
minutes of civility. That may be
exceeding expectations.
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: I thought it was
-- well, the headline of the
night is going to be the -- when
he was asked if he would support
the election, and he said, I
will keep you in suspense about
that over the election results.
That is going to be the headline
of the night. It's hard to
believe we've...
AMY WALTER, The Cook
Political Report: For sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For sure.
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: ... presidential
candidate say that in a national
debate.
I, frankly, thought it one of
the best debate performances
that Hillary Clinton has ever
given. I thought he was -- he
has improved, but she gave four
answers that I think knocked
him out of the park, especially
on the sexual abuse issue, on 30
years of experience, on
that episode.
She gave some extremely strong
and coherent and Michelle
Obama-esque answers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it was
Michelle Obama, Mark, who said,
"When they go low, we go high."
Chris Wallace, at the end, asked
them both to be positive, but we
heard some -- we heard
negative language
to the very end.
MARK SHIELDS: We did.
I thought Trump was better
temperamentally tonight than he
had been in any of the debates.
If he had been that in the first
debate, I think it would have
been -- it would have
been a different race.
But I think we come back to the
tape. The tape is a killer to
him. And I think that...
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mean the
"Access Hollywood" audiotape.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: I think the
dynamic of tonight, it was his
bad moment. I don't think people
believe him. And it was
her better moment.
But I -- he didn't get the lift
he needed. And I thought there
were episodes of just
incoherence on his part.
I disagree with David. I thought
Hillary had some great answers,
but I thought there were
excessive phases of just sort of
bland, predictable prose. We're
going to grow the -- how many
times are we going to grow the
economy? Is that a phrase that
has sort of reached its
saturation point or
expiration date?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter?
AMY WALTER: So, the only
question coming out of this
debate was whether or not he
could
stop what was looking like a
freefall in the polls and
whether that freefall was also
going
to hurt the down-ballot
candidates, especially Senate
candidates, in battleground
states.
I don't think it really helped
at all here. And David is right.
The headline is that a
president -- a candidate running
for president of the United
States of America said, I don't
know if I'm going to abide by
the decision made by voters.
That is just an unbelievable
statement. And the number one
challenge that Donald Trump
has had throughout this
campaign, when you look at where
he has fallen flat with voters,
is on the question, do you think
that Donald Trump has the
judgment and the temperament
to be president of
the United States?
He has trailed Hillary Clinton
on that time and time again.
It's now a gaping chasm on
that issue. And he did not
challenge her on that and help
expand his -- do any better
on that the question of judgment
and temperament tonight, either
by interrupting her, and then,
of course, by making the
statement he did that he's going
to keep people in suspense.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we should
note that he said this on a day
when both his vice presidential
running mate, Mike Pence, who we
see there in the audience, has
been saying -- and he
said it again today -- that we
will accept the results of the
election, his daughter
Ivanka Trump said today that
she expected her father would.
Let's listen to that part of the
debate where moderator Chris
Wallace asked Donald Trump
directly, will you accept the
result no matter what it is?
DONALD TRUMP: I will look at it
at the time. I'm not looking at
anything now. I will look
at it at the time.
What I have seen -- what I have
seen is so bad. First of all,
the media is so dishonest
and so corrupt, and the pile-on
is so amazing. The New York
Times actually wrote an article
about it, but they don't even
care. It's so dishonest. And
they've poisoned the minds
of the voters.
But, unfortunately for them, I
think the voters are seeing
through it. I think they're
going
to see through it. We'll
find out on November 8.
If you look at your voter rolls,
you will see millions of people
that are registered
to vote, millions -- this isn't
coming from me -- this is coming
from Pew report and other
places -- millions of people
that are registered to vote that
shouldn't be registered to vote.
CHRIS WALLACE, Moderator: Are
you saying you're not prepared
now to commit to that principle?
DONALD TRUMP: What I'm saying is
that I will tell you at the
time. I will keep you in
suspense.
OK?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Well,
Chris, let me respond to that,
because that's horrifying.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, it doesn't
get any plainer, I guess, than
that.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. And I
wonder if it will hurt him.
The reason we concede elections,
and the reason why every
candidate in our history has
conceded
elections, and has said so all
along that they respect the will
of the voters, is because
this is coherence
of the country.
The struggle for power can get
ruthless in the world. And when
you -- and you can lead
to war. It can lead to conflict.
It can lead to barbarity. And
the reason we don't do fall
into barbarity is because not
that we're wonderful people, but
we have certain customs and
standards
which we adhere to.
And not adhering to those
customs and standards really
does put you on the edge of some
sort
of dissent from the system we
have enjoyed, which is not only
based on the laws, but our
attitudes toward the laws.
And so he is violating and
corrupting those attitudes. How
many people in America agree
with him? Well, people have done
studies of this, and somewhere
between a third and 40
percent think they don't trust
our system of government
anymore.
And so this is a time of maximum
cynicism, which he is part of
and also inflamed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we have been
seeing people at his rallies,
Mark, in recent days say they
won't accept her. They may not
accept the results of the
election.
MARK SHIELDS: No, that's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How
serious do you see this?
MARK SHIELDS: I think it is
serious. I think it's the lead.
There's no question of it.
We have never had a
president do that before.
I was in Washington when the
moment of maximum constitutional
crisis, when Richard Nixon
left the presidency. There were
no tanks in the streets. There
were no rifles. It was
peaceable. It was peaceful. It
was lawful. And Gerald Ford
became president.
What Trump -- what's wrong with
Trump here is his -- he's
stepping on his basic message.
His basic message is, I'm the
strong guy, I'm the guy. And
now, oh, poor little me.
Woe is me. They have
rigged it on me.
So, it's the strong man as
whiner. And it's just a -- it's
a terrible message. And it
doesn't work politically. But I
think it is a -- I mean, "I will
look at it the time"
is -- Stephen A. Douglas
conceded to Abraham Lincoln
after a bitter campaign and
said,
you know, you are my
president, God bless you.
And that -- it was such a
small, small mind and man...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy.
AMY WALTER: If it weren't for
that quote, I think the other
one that would be leading
tonight would be early on, when
the question about the Supreme
Court and who would be appointed
to the Supreme Court by each of
these candidates, and Donald
Trump conceded the fact he's
going
to not just appoint pro-life
justices, but that he expects
them to overturn Roe v. Wade.
That would be -- again, if this
were any other campaign, if we
were on parallel Earth 2 in
a normal kind of campaign, that
would have been a really amazing
statement. And, again,
this is for a candidate who is
doing very badly with women
candidates, especially suburban
women.
That is the kind of statement
that just makes his ability to
dig himself out of the hole
he's in very, very tough.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: I was just going
to say, our -- I will come back
to you in a minute.
Our John Yang, "NewsHour"'s John
Yang, is at the debate site at
the University of Nevada,
Las Vegas.
John, you're in the spin room.
You have been trying to catch up
with people speaking for
both campaigns. What
are you hearing?
JOHN YANG: Judy, I tell you, I
have just spoken to number of
people from the Clinton
campaign,
not only here in the spin
room, but by e-mail.
The two moments that they single
out in this debate were both
Donald Trump moments, one
where he, as you have been
talking about, said he wouldn't
pledge to accept the outcome
of the election, and then also
when he wouldn't acknowledge or
wouldn't accept the U.S.
intelligence
assessment that Russia is behind
the hacks, the WikiLeaks hacks.
They say this shows that
he's unfit for office.
Now, what I also asked them
that, in all three debates, it
seems that their message has
been
that -- the negative message
against Donald Trump,
essentially that Hillary Clinton
should
be elected because she's
not Donald Trump.
I asked if she had made the
positive message for herself.
They all pointed to the closing
statement, which wasn't planned,
as you heard. But they also say
that the pivot starts now,
that, in these debates, because
of what Donald Trump has done,
they had to make that. They
had to go after him because
of what he was doing.
They say that, from now on, on
the campaign trail, for the next
few weeks, or couple of
weeks, the closing argument is
going to be a positive one,
presenting what Hillary Clinton
will do as president if she's
elected, making a positive
argument for her, rather than
the
negative argument
against Donald Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, John,
who has been talking, as we
heard, to Clinton and to Trump
representatives there in the
spin room in Las Vegas.
David Brooks, did you hear
Hillary Clinton doing that,
making that pivot from making
the case against Donald Trump to
saying, here is why I'm the
right person?
DAVID BROOKS: Not really, no.
I think she does -- I will give
Mark 20 yards in the 100-yard
field. She does devolve into
cliche and stereotypical thought
when asked to make the positive
case. And her best answers
are attacks at him.
I think she has got some
indignation that she's facing
this guy and indignation about
some of the things he has said
and his treatment toward women.
In many ways, her entire life
has been in defense of women's
rights. And here comes, at the
climax of her political
life, her electoral life, a guy
who seems to her a threat and an
insult to all that.
And so she's
rightfully indignant.
Has she made a positive case for
herself? I think not. But that
is in part because it's
in both their interests right
now to make him the center of
attention. And he -- she
could have had a
very bad day today.
These video clips of her loose
campaign staff allegedly saying
they are fomenting violence
and doing voter fraud, it could
have been a terrible day for
her. And yet he made himself
the center even of
his own remarks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He did on
several -- at several points.
All right, our colleague Lisa
Desjardins is in our newsroom
upstairs, who has been looking
at some -- what we
call the fact-check.
Lisa, what did you discover?
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, you know,
one of the headlines of this
debate that might not get
as much attention is the amount
of policy that was discussed
tonight.
It was certainly the most that I
have think we have seen this
presidential election. And
we want to look at some of the
facts around those policies.
Up near the top, we heard lot
about guns and the Second
Amendment. And Hillary Clinton
made a claim. She claimed that,
in this country, some 33,000
people are killed by guns, die
from gun injuries a year. We
checked that. And according to
the CDC, the latest available
data shows she's right.
Just over 33,000 people are
killed from firearms. But we
really need to add some context,
because
63 percent, almost two-thirds of
those firearm deaths, are
suicides, not homicide.
Also, what is interesting to
know about that number, that is
approximately as many people
who are killed in car crashes in
this country as well.
Additionally, the U.S. gun death
rate is about 25 times higher
than the similar rates in
similar high-income countries.
All right, how about a claim
from Donald Trump? We heard a
lot about the economy. Donald
Trump
claims that the U.S. economy is
stagnant. He used those words --
that word exactly.
Well, if you look at the
numbers, GDP was up almost 2,
almost 2.5 percent last year.
Last month -- this is the report
that Donald Trump cited -- the
country gained 156,000
jobs. So, that certainly is not
stagnant. There is an increase.
But it is below the
ideal and even below what
economists like to see, which is
3 percent GDP growth.
So, he may have been right when
he said anemic, not stagnant.
Job growth, as Mark Shields
said, a bland, predictable piece
of prose, but an important piece
of policy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you, Lisa,
for keeping track of all that
and a lot more during the
debate.
Mark, at this stage in the
campaign, with less than three
weeks to go, how much do these
things matter, whether you get
the exact description right on
the economy or not?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, they matter
into everybody's decision, Judy.
The decision process is very
personal. But I think the
decision has been made.
Just one -- one point where
Hillary did get in trouble in
April of this year, if you will
recall, when she said an unborn
person doesn't have any
constitutional rights. And she
was
attacked by Planned Parenthood
for saying that, because you
have to use the language,
which is fetus.
And it's interesting. She's gone
from a time when abortion was
safe, legal and rare. Now
the Democratic position is,
abortion shall be available. I
mean, it's -- the rare part
has been dropped totally from
the Democratic rhetoric, I think
it's fair to say.
She was an ardent, really
unfettered pro-choice advocate
tonight. And she has been
criticized
by some of the pro-choice groups
in the past for talking about
the person who -- of an
unborn...
DAVID BROOKS: It's one thing.
Presidential candidates used to
say that, oh, I'm not going
to impose a litmus test here.
And that was actually a very
valuable thing to say, because
it did protect -- or at least
make a pretense that the
judiciary is about the
Constitution, and it's not
strictly a
political office.
And that idea, that we don't
have litmus tests, that's gone.
It's like, we're -- I'm going
to pick the people
who are on my side.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I mean, and
there's no question about that.
AMY WALTER: Which has been going
on, right, for quite some while.
She's going to pick people who
are going to stand with her on
Citizens United and the
decision there, and he's going
to pick people who stand on
abortion rights.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy, we did hear,
as Lisa said, a lot more about
policy tonight. Chris Wallace
made a point of ticking off
those six subject areas,
entitlements and debt.
Did we learn anything new
from these candidates?
AMY WALTER: No. No,
we really didn't.
Well, again, this is hard for
somebody who has been following
this all year. So, I recognize
most normal people do not sit
and listen to the candidates,
which is all the time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: More than a year.
AMY WALTER: Yes, more -- it has
felt like a hundred years, this
campaign. So, I recognize
that.
But we kind of come back to
where we started in discussing
this debate, which is, there
is still not a lot of substance
there with Donald Trump. It's a
lot of the same talking
points, but you're not really
getting much more, much more
than that.
Hillary Clinton, I felt like,
did tick through some of the
talking points that she usually
hits on. But I do feel like
Donald Trump had the opportunity
in this case to give more
details about the economy. And
looking at the polling, it's the
one issue where people
say they trust him more
than Hillary Clinton.
And yet, when he had the chance,
when the economy was literally
teed up to him, he pivoted
back to explain himself and the
attack that Hillary Clinton made
on him about missiles
and nuclear weapons.
And so any time, even on issue
that is supposedly in his
wheelhouse, he had a hard time
making
that case.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I thought that
happened a couple of different
-- several different times,
where
she was able, because of the way
she phrased something, to
frankly get under his skin...
MARK SHIELDS: She did.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... and to get
him -- and to goad him into
probably something he didn't
mean to talk about.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
I thought her answer of the 30
years was probably the strongest
answer she had, what I was doing
those 30 years and what were you
doing. And I think it -- I think
it did bother him, Judy.
I think there was another
problem that Trump had tonight.
And that is the denigration of
America and its leadership: Our
country has no idea. We're
losers.
It's one thing to criticize
policy or policy decisions, but,
boy, he makes it sound like
the United States has done
nothing right. And I just -- I
think that our country has
no idea, I think it has no
political salience or appeal.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I think
I disagree with that.
MARK SHIELDS: OK.
DAVID BROOKS: That's been his
secret sauce all year, and that
there are -- the level
of anger, the level of disgust,
the level of deep, deep
pessimism is -- that's why we
have Donald Trump.
And so he's closing with what
his -- and he closed his debate
comments with his strongest
close: I'm different.
MARK SHIELDS: It's a primary
argument. It's not a general
argument.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, let's -- for
the final minute-and-a-half that
we have left, Amy,
where does this campaign go from
here? We have, what, 20 days --
19 days left.
AMY WALTER: We're 19 days now,
19 left. Remember, two million
people have already voted.
So, this debate, we talk about
changing minds, are there
undecided voters? A lot of folks
have already cast their
ballots before this debate.
I think what this debate
reminded us is that the
candidates really are doubling
and tripling
down on their message, on their
overall closing argument.
For Trump, it's that his base is
more important than expanding
his ceiling. He's going to
continue to make the same case
he's made in the primaries
throughout the general, even
though it only appeals to a
narrow slice of Americans,
Hillary Clinton going to
continue
to make Donald Trump the focus,
but also try to make sure that
he doesn't get any expansion.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Twenty
seconds, Mark.
MARK SHIELDS: It was the last
great moment. The rest of it is
parallel skiing. And this
was the intersection. This was
his chance to change the race.
And he didn't do it tonight.
DAVID BROOKS: And will Mike
Pence agree? Will he reiterate
that he's going to support the
election results no matter what?
That -- to see how their
positions evolve over the next
few days on that question
will be interesting.
MARK SHIELDS: Every
Republican candidate...
JUDY WOODRUFF: It will be
really interesting to see.
AMY WALTER: Every Republican.
MARK SHIELDS: ... will
be asked that tomorrow.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes. And Mike
Pence was asked it tonight, I'm
guessing. So, we will find
out what he had to say.
Amy Walter, David Brooks, Mark
Shields, we thank you all.
And that wraps up our coverage
of this final presidential
debate of the election.
As always, there is much more
online. You can watch highlights
at PBS.org/"NewsHour."
Plus, you can watch those
fact-checks from our "NewsHour"
team.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
And do join us right back here
for the "NewsHour" tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour" family, thank you, and
good night.